ROBIN HOOD.




EARLY SCHOOL-DAYS.


Tales of Robin Hood and his merry foresters were the delight of my
boyhood.

Many an hour which my school-fellows spent in games of cricket or
leap-frog, I passed happily away in the rustic arbour that we had built
in the corner of our play-ground, deeply intent upon a volume of old
ballads that chance had thrown before me. Sometimes a companion or two,
weary of the sport in which they had been engaged, would join me in my
retreat, and ask me to read aloud; and seldom would they leave me till
the school-bell warned us that it was time to return to our duties.

After the tasks of the day were done we had two hours at our disposal
before we were again called to study our lessons for the following
morning. In these short intervals it was that, forgetting for awhile
Cæsar, Cicero, and Virgil, freed from restraint, and exulting in health
and spirits, we passed the happiest moments of our early days.

Though many years have since glided away, I can recall these pleasures
most vividly. Well do I recollect the youth who shared my bed, and who in
school hours sat next me on the first form; and well do I remember, as
we sauntered together one bright summer’s evening through the shrubbery
that encircled our play-ground, his asking me to tell him some tale of
Robin Hood. Willingly I complied. There was an old sycamore tree close
by, standing alone upon a little lawn. Its weather-beaten trunk was girt
round by a low seat, whence, through an opening in the trees, a wide
extent of country presented itself to the view. The shrubbery was upon
the side of a steep hill, at whose base lay broad and verdant meadows:
through these a navigable river winded peacefully along, bearing upon
its surface the white lateen sail of the gay pleasure-boat, or the more
dingy brown canvas of the heavily laden barge, that constantly lent a
fresh charm to the delightful landscape. Beyond the meadows was a little
village, almost concealed by the venerable trees that surrounded it,
while, to the left, the white front of some noble mansion glistened afar
off, amid the dark tint of the distant foliage. Many a time had I chosen
this favourite bench, and now, with my young friend at my side, I again
reclined against the broad old trunk. Scarce had we seated ourselves
when another of our school-fellows happened to pass by, and at the
intercession of my companion stayed to listen to my promised tale.

I endeavoured to recall the earliest mention of my brave hero in the
ballads that told of his exploits, and thus began:—


ROBIN HOOD’S YOUTH.

“More than six hundred years ago, in the reigns of King Henry the
Second and Richard Cœur de Lion, there lived in the northern part of
England a most famous outlaw, named Robin Hood. The daring exploits and
curious adventures of this renowned hero have been celebrated in songs
throughout almost every country in Europe; and so great a favourite has
he always been in England, that, as the old poet says,

    “‘In this our spacious isle I think there is not one
    But he of Robin Hood hath heard, and Little John;
    And, to the end of time, the tales shall ne’er be done
    Of Scarlet, George-a-Green, and Much, the miller’s son;
    Of Tuck, the merry friar, which many a sermon made
    In praise of Robin Hood, his outlaws, and their trade.’

“Robin Hood, whose true name appears to have been Robert Fitzooth, was
born and bred in the sweet town of Locksley, in merry Nottinghamshire,
about the year 1160. He was a very handsome youth, with light auburn
hair, and dark bright eyes that glanced and sparkled like stars, and was
the most expert archer and bravest wrestler among all the lads of the
county, from whom he oft-times bore away the prize in their rural sports.
One day as Robin Hood was going to Nottingham upon a visit to his uncle
he passed by an ale-house, at the door of which stood several foresters,
keepers of the king’s parks, drinking ale and wine. Young Robin joined
the party, and entered into conversation with them, when he learned that
the king had commanded a shooting match to be held at a town close by in
the course of the following week.

“‘I will be there,’ cried Robin Hood with great glee, ‘and will show King
Henry a good cloth-yard arrow well shot.’

“‘Ha! ha!’ laughed one of the foresters. ‘Dost thou think that a
stripling like thee may shoot before a king? I’ faith, my young fellow,
thou must give place to better men.’

“Robin Hood’s brow flushed with anger at this slight, and he half drew
his dagger from its sheath, but recollecting himself—‘I’ll wager thee
twenty crowns,’ he replied, ‘that I will strike a deer at five hundred
yards.’

“‘Done,’ cried the forester. ‘I bet thee twenty crowns thou canst not.
Our host shall hold the stakes while we go into yonder wood.’

“‘Agreed,’ said Robin Hood; ‘and if I do not _kill_ the deer thou shalt
win the bet.’ Each then paid twenty crowns to the host, and the whole
party set out merrily to the wood. Young Robin strung his noble bow, and
chose one of his best arrows, and in a few minutes a hart bounded across
the plain. Although the animal was at a considerable distance farther
off than the space agreed upon, Robin would not lose the chance; he drew
his arrow to the head, and let fly with such force that when it struck
the deer upon its side the poor creature fell plunging to the earth in a
stream of its own blood.

“‘Give me the money,’ said Robin Hood proudly, to the host, ‘if ’twere a
thousand pound, I’ve won the wager.’

“‘The wager’s none of thine,’ cried the man with whom he had laid the
bet. ‘Thou hadst better take up thy bow and begone, or by’r lady I’ll
make thee rue this day;’ and thus saying he bestowed a buffet on the
young archer’s head, while the other keepers stood by and laughed.

“Robin Hood took up his bow as he was bidden, without saying a word,
and smiled as he ran away from them across the plain. When he had got
some good distance off, he turned round, and aiming at the treacherous
forester, let fly a shaft which struck him upon the breast, pierced
his heart, and laid him dead upon the spot. Before his companions had
recovered from their surprise, Robin Hood sent arrow after arrow among
them, wounding some severely, and stretching others lifeless upon the
grass.

“The people of Nottingham hearing of this, came out in great numbers
to take the bold young archer, but he had escaped far away before they
arrived; therefore, contenting themselves with taking the bodies of the
dead foresters, they buried them ‘all in a row,’ in the churchyard in
Nottingham.

“For a long time afterwards Robin Hood dared not show himself in any town
or village, as a reward was offered for his apprehension; but he lived in
the forests under the green-wood trees, where he quickly met with several
other youths who for various causes had been outlawed like himself.

“In these times immense tracts of land, especially in Nottinghamshire and
Yorkshire, were covered with dense woods, which generally abounded in
deer and every description of game; and as these were the property of the
king, rangers or foresters were appointed for their protection, and the
penalty against any one who dared to slay a stag was death.

“Robin Hood and his companions cared very little for these rangers, who
indeed stood but a poor chance against them. They shot the king’s deer
whenever they were in want of food, and cooked it well enough by a fire
kindled with branches of the royal trees.

“They likewise were sometimes bold enough to stop his majesty’s liege
subjects upon the highway, and politely request the loan of a few pounds,
which was most frequently granted them without their giving any security
for its repayment, the poor traveller being glad to escape with a safe
body.

“As the young outlaw thus continued to live in Sherwood forest, his
superior skill in archery and his prowess at all manly exercises gained
him great fame. Many young men joined him in his retreat, and placed
themselves under his leadership, so that he soon found himself captain of
at least three-score gallant youths.

“Robin Hood and his followers all dressed themselves in cloth of Lincoln
green, and generally wore a scarlet cap upon their heads. Each man was
armed with a dagger and a short basket-hilted sword, and carried a long
bow in his hand, while a quiver filled with arrows a cloth-yard long hung
at his back. The captain, besides wearing a better cloth than his men,
always carried with him a bugle horn, whose notes he taught his followers
to distinguish at a most incredible distance.

“One day Robin Hood said to his men, ‘My brave fellows, here have we
been fourteen long days without any kind of sport. Stay ye here awhile
among the green leaves, while I go forth in search of some adventure.
If I want your assistance three blasts on my bugle horn will tell ye
where I am.’ And bidding them adieu for the present, he shook hands with
them, and with his trusty bow in his hand set out on his expedition. He
soon reached the high road, where he thought he should most easily meet
with something to do, and marched along boldly for a considerable way.
Presently he came to a wide but shallow brook that ran across the road,
over which there was but one narrow bridge, that would only permit a
single person to cross at a time. Just as Robin Hood set his foot upon
the plank at one end a traveller appeared upon the other side, and as
neither would return they met in the middle of the bridge. The stranger
was a tall handsome young fellow nearly seven feet high, but unarmed,
except with a stout oaken staff.

“‘Go back,’ cried he to Robin Hood, ‘or ’twill be the worse for thee.’

“‘Ha! ha!’ laughed Robin, ‘surely thou jestest, man. Were I to bend this
good bow of mine I could send an arrow through thy heart before thou
could’st even strike;’ and stepping back a pace or two he drew a shaft
from his quiver and fixed it ready to shoot.

“‘Thou talk’st like a coward,’ replied the stranger; ‘with a long bow
drawn against one who has but an oaken staff.’

“‘I am no coward,’ answered Robin Hood, ‘and that thou shalt see. Stay on
the bridge awhile. I’ll be with thee again in the twinkling of an arrow.’
And laying aside his bow he ran back along the plank, plunged into a
thicket close at hand, and quickly returned bearing a good oak branch.

“‘Now,’ cried he to the traveller, ‘now we are equally matched; let’s
fight out our quarrel on the bridge; whoever throws the other into the
water shall win the day, and so we’ll part.’

“‘With all my heart,’ replied the stranger, ‘for go back I will not;’ and
without a word farther he bestowed such a thwack on the head of Robin
Hood that his teeth chattered together.

“‘Thou shalt have as good as thou giv’st,’ cried Robin, and laid such a
blow on the shoulder of his opponent that every bone in his body rung
again. At it they then went in right earnest, and thick and fast rattled
the staves upon their heads and backs, appearing like men threshing corn.
Getting more enraged at every stroke, they laid about each other with so
much fury that their jackets smoked as if they had been on fire; but at
last the stranger gave Robin Hood a blow upon the side of his head that
made him stagger, and losing his balance the outlaw tumbled into the
brook.

“‘Where art thou now, my fine fellow?’ cried the victorious stranger,
laughing.

“‘Good faith,’ replied Robin Hood, ‘I’m in the water, and floating
bravely with the tide. But thou art a bold yeoman I needs must say, and
I’ll fight no more with thee. Thou hast got the day and there’s an end
of our battle.’ Then wading to the bank he caught hold of a projecting
branch of a tree, pulled himself out of the brook, and setting his bugle
to his lips blew three such loud and lusty blasts that the woods and
valleys echoed and re-echoed them, till they reached the ears of his
merry bowmen. In a few minutes they all appeared dressed in their bright
green coats, and ranged themselves round Robin Hood, who was lying on the
grass to rest his bruised limbs.

“‘Good master,’ cried one of them, named Will Stutely, ‘what wantest thou
with thy merry men? Hast thou fallen into the brook?’

“‘No matter,’ replied their captain; ‘this youth and I have had a famous
fight, and he knocked me into the water.’

“‘We’ll duck him, we’ll duck him,’ exclaimed the men, running up to the
stranger, and seizing him by the arms.

“‘Forbear!’ shouted Robin Hood. ‘He is a brave young fellow, and must be
one of us.’ Then, springing to his feet, he advanced towards him. ‘No one
shall harm thee, friend,’ he said; ‘these merry men are mine. There are
three-score and nine, and if thou wilt join them thou shalt have a coat
of Lincoln green like theirs, a dagger, a good broadsword, and a bow and
arrows, with which we will soon teach thee to kill the fat fallow-deer.’

“‘Here’s my hand on it,’ replied the stranger, striking his palm into
that of the bold outlaw; ‘I’ll serve thee with my whole heart. My name is
John Little, but thou’lt find I can do much, and that I’ll play my part
with the best.’

“‘His name must be altered,’ said Will Stutely. ‘I’ll be his godfather,
and we’ll have a merry christening in the green-wood.’

“A brace of fat does were presently shot, and a fresh barrel of humming
strong ale was broached for the occasion. Robin Hood and his followers
then stood in a ring, while Will Stutely, attended by seven of the
tallest, dressed themselves in black garments that had once belonged to
some unfortunate priests, and prepared to baptize this pretty infant.
They carried him into the midst of the ring, and throwing a bucket of
water over his face, for fear a little sprinkling might not be enough,
Will Stutely in a very solemn tone said, ‘This infant has hitherto been
called John Little; we do now hereby change his name, which from the
present day to the end of his life shall be called Little John.’

“A loud shout from the men made the forest ring again. When this ceremony
was concluded, and when Robin Hood had given his new attendant a coat
of Lincoln green, and a curiously carved long-bow, they all sat down on
the grass to a merry feast. Music succeeded, and their bold captain, in
honour of his new guest, trolled forth the following song:—

    “‘You’re welcome, my lad, to the forests o’ green,
      Where the wild deer so merrily bounds;
    Where the foresters bold their gay revels hold,
      And their bugle-horn cheerily sounds.

    “‘Thou shalt be an archer, as well as the best,
      And range in the green-wood with us;
    Where we’ll not want gold nor silver, behold,
      While bishops have aught in their purse.

    “‘We live here like ’squires, or lords of renown,
      Without e’er a foot of free land;
    We feast on good cheer, with wine, ale, and beer,
      And ev’ry thing at our command.

    “‘Then welcome, my lad, to the merry green-wood,
      Where the wild deer so joyously bounds;
    Where the foresters bold their gay revels hold,
      And their bugle-horn cheerily sounds.’

[Illustration: “THOU’RT WELCOME MY LAD TO THE MERRY GREEN-WOOD.”

J. Gilbert]

“Merrily and gaily did they pass the evening; now dancing round some old
monarch of the forest, and now listening to the rude but pleasing ditty
of one of their companions. At length the sun went down, and the deep
shades of the forest began to draw around them. Robin Hood drew forth his
bugle, sounded a few notes, and in a minute or two the whole band were
dispersed in groups to their huts and caves.


ROBIN HOOD AND THE BUTCHER.

“Shortly after this merry-making Robin Hood was one morning sitting by
the way-side, amusing himself with trimming his bow and arrows, when he
espied a jolly butcher hastening to market with a basket of meat before
him upon his horse.

“‘Good morrow, my fine fellow,’ quoth Robin Hood as he passed by. ‘What
may’st thou have in that basket there?’

“‘What’s that to thee,’ replied the butcher: ‘thou’lt not buy it I’ll
warrant me.’

“‘Nay, now, my good friend, be civil,’ returned the outlaw, rising
from the grass, and patting the man’s horse upon the neck. ‘What value
settest thou upon this beast of thine, and the basket, altogether?’

“‘Well! an thou mean’st to buy,’ answered the butcher, still doubting,
‘thou shalt have the whole lot for four silver marks.’

“‘Throw that greasy frock of thine into the bargain,’ said Robin, ‘and
here’s thy money:’ at the same time he took some silver pieces from a
leathern pouch that hung from his girdle, and held them to the butcher.
With great joy at having made so good a bargain, the man instantly
dismounted, and giving his horse’s reins to his new owner, he quickly
stripped off his outer garment. The bold outlaw as quickly encased
himself in it, and, mounting the horse, took the basket from the butcher,
and galloped off to Nottingham.

“When he reached the town, Robin Hood made his way to the part where the
meat was sold; and having put up his horse at an inn, he uncovered his
basket, and began to sell its contents. He knew very little and cared
very little about the price that was usually paid for meat, and the
ladies in the market quickly discovered that he gave about five times as
much for a penny as any other butcher. His stall was soon surrounded,
and his brethren in the trade were left without a customer. At first they
could not imagine what could be the reason of so strange an occurrence;
but when one of them learned that the new butcher had actually sold a
whole leg of pork for a shilling, a general council was held, and it was
unanimously agreed that he must either be mad, or some prodigal son who
had run away with his father’s property: but they were all determined to
learn something certain about him.

“When the market was over, one of them stepped up to Robin Hood. ‘Come,
brother,’ said he to him, ‘we are all of one trade, come and dine with us
to-day.’

“‘Right willingly that will I,’ replied the outlaw; ‘and a jolly dinner
will we have. ’Tis my first day among ye, and by my faith it shall be
a merry one.’ They were soon seated at the board, at the head of which
presided the sheriff of Nottingham, while ‘mine host’ sat at the other
end. Robin Hood, being a new comer, said grace, and they commenced a most
fearful attack upon divers smoking flanks of beef, and many a goodly
haunch of venison. The jovial outlaw did his duty with the rest, and
when at last the dishes were allowed to be taken away, ‘Fill us more
wine,’ he cried, ‘let’s be merry, my brethren; drink till ye can drink no
more; I’ll pay the reckoning.’

“‘This is a mad blade,’ said the sheriff to his next neighbour; ‘we must
find out who he is.’—‘Hast thou, friend,’ he continued aloud, addressing
Robin Hood, ‘hast thou any horned beasts to dispose of?’

“‘Aye, good master sheriff, that have I,’ answered Robin, ‘some two or
three hundreds, and a hundred acres of as good free land too as thou’st
ever seen.’

“‘I want a few head of cattle,’ rejoined the former, ‘and if thou wilt,
I’ll ride this day to look at thine.’

“‘Fill me a bumper of sack,’ cried Robin Hood; ‘here’s to a good
bargain;’ and tossing off a goblet of wine, he rose up, threw a handful
of silver upon the table, and with the sheriff left the astonished
butchers to finish their wine and talk of their extraordinary comrade.

“The man of dignity saddled his palfrey, and tying a heavy bag of gold,
wherewith to pay for his purchase, to his girdle, set out with Robin Hood
to Sherwood forest. Merry were the jokes and loud was the laughter of
the bold outlaw as they trotted along the road, and the sheriff thought
that he had never met with so pleasant a companion. ‘Heaven preserve us,’
said he, ‘from a man they call Robin Hood, who often frequents these
woods.’

“‘Fear not, master sheriff,’ replied Robin; ‘I saw him in Nottingham town
not two hours ago, and I’ll warrant me he has not overtaken us.’

“‘In Nottingham!’ cried the sheriff, with astonishment: ‘why didst not
thou tell me that before? I must go back and capture him.’

“‘’Twill be a profitless errand for thee,’ answered the outlaw. ‘Though
I know Robin Hood as well as my own self, ’twas with difficulty I
recognised him in his disguise.’ The sheriff looked hard at his
companion, as he claimed so intimate a knowledge with the outlawed
forester, but said not a word, only spurring his horse on faster, and
keeping as far from his fellow-traveller as the width of the road
permitted.

“Presently they arrived at the borders of the forest, and striking
into a narrow road that led through it, reached an open lawn of some
considerable extent. Just as they entered upon it, a whole herd of deer
tripped gaily across the path.

“‘How likest thou my horned beasts, master sheriff?’ asked Robin Hood;
‘they are fat and in good condition, are they not?’

“‘I must tell thee, good fellow,’ returned the sheriff, reining up his
palfrey, ‘that I would rather be elsewhere than in thy company.’

“Robin Hood replied by taking his bugle-horn from his side, and blowing
three distinct blasts that made the woods re-echo, and his companion’s
ears to tingle with no small degree of apprehension.

“‘Thou art a knave,’ cried he, ‘and hast played me false; take that for
payment:’ and the terrified sheriff drew his sword and struck fiercely at
the outlaw, who, spurring his steed aside, dexterously avoided the blow.
In a moment after, sixty or more foresters, with Little John at their
head, burst from the thickets and surrounded the two horsemen.

“‘Welcome, good master;’ said Little John to his captain. ‘What will’st
thou with thy merry men?’

“‘I have brought the sheriff of Nottingham to dine with ye to-day,’
replied Robin Hood; ‘make good cheer, and give him of the best.’

“‘Aye, marry, that will we,’ returned the tall forester, ‘for I know he
has gold to pay for it:’ and gently obliging the sheriff to dismount,
he unfastened the bag from the unfortunate man’s girdle, and taking his
cloak from his shoulders, he spread it upon the grass, and emptied the
gold upon it.

“‘Three hundred pounds will serve us for many a carouse,’ said Little
John, when he had counted the money and replaced it in the bag. ‘And now,
master sheriff,’ he continued, laughing, ‘would’st thou like venison for
thy dinner? Hast thou any stomach for a smoking haunch?’

“‘Let me away,’ cried the sheriff, running to his horse’s side, ‘or
you’ll all rue this day.’

“Robin Hood sprang to his assistance, held the stirrup while he mounted,
and politely wishing him a pleasant journey home, desired to be
especially commended to his wife. The poor sheriff, glad to escape sound
in body, returned no answer; but striking spurs into his palfrey was soon
out of sight. The merry foresters quickly repaired to their wonted spot,
and with many a bumper of ale or wine, drank to the health and prosperity
of the liberal sheriff of Nottingham.


ROBIN HOOD AND WILL SCARLET.

“The bold outlaws were afraid to show themselves for some time after this
adventure, and for several weeks retired to a distant forest, where their
haunts were not so well known as in Sherwood.

“Robin Hood was one morning rambling among the woods, when, through the
branches of the trees, he caught sight of a gay young fellow walking
carelessly along and whistling merrily. The stranger was clothed in
a silken doublet of beautiful scarlet, his hose were likewise of the
same bright colour, and his gay green cap was ornamented with a crimson
feather. By his side hung a handsome broadsword, the hilt of which
was studded with precious stones, and in his left hand he carried an
elegantly carved bow; while a quiver of polished oak, inlaid with silver,
was suspended by a silken baldric at his back.

“As he emerged from the thicket upon a little plain, on which the
noon-day sun was permitted to shine unobscured by the deep foliage that
on all sides surrounded him, the traveller’s heart leapt with joy at the
sight of a herd of deer grazing quietly at the other end of the verdant
glade.

“‘The fattest among ye,’ quoth he, loud enough for the outlaw to
over-hear him, ‘shall serve my dinner to-day:’ and drawing an arrow from
his quiver, he fixed it upon his bow, and discharged the weapon with such
keen velocity that the noblest animal among the herd fell dead at the
distance of forty yards.

“‘Well shot! well shot, my friend!’ cried Robin Hood, advancing from his
concealment. ‘Would’st like to be a forester in this merry green-wood?’

“‘Where springest thou from?’ said the stranger, turning round sharply at
the sound of a voice: ‘Go thou thine own way; I’ll go mine.’

“‘If thou’lt accept the place,’ returned the outlaw, unheeding this angry
reply, ‘I’ll make thee a bold yeoman, and give thee livery of mine.’

“‘Livery!’ cried the other. ‘By St. George, an thou dost not take to
thine heels, I’ll give thee such a buffet as shall make thine ears ring
for many a mile.’

“Robin Hood drew back a step, and bent his ever-ready bow, and at the
same time the stranger, quick as thought, drew another arrow from his
quiver, and pointed it at the outlaw.

“‘Hold! hold!’ cried the latter. ‘This is cowards’ play. Take thy sword,
man, and let’s fight it out under yonder tree.’

“‘With all my heart,’ replied the traveller; ‘and by my faith I will
not leave thee till thou dost cry “‘a mercy.”’ Then laying aside their
bows, each drew his sword, and stepping beneath the shade of a broad old
oak, began the combat in right good earnest. The bold outlaw, seizing an
unguarded moment, laid a blow upon the shoulder of his opponent that made
him wince again; but, in retaliation, the stranger rushed furiously at
Robin Hood, and struck him so violently upon the head that the blood ran
trickling down from every hair.

“‘Mercy, good fellow—mercy,’ he cried, dropping his sword’s point to the
earth, and leaning himself against the tree; ‘thou hast fairly beaten me.
Tell me,—who art thou? and what seek’st thou here?’

“‘Ha! thou alterest thy tone now,’ answered the victor with a laugh;
‘but, if thou’rt a true man, thou may’st stand my friend. Know’st thou
where dwells a yeoman they call Robin Hood?’

“‘Wherefore dost thou seek him?’ inquired the outlaw.

“‘I am his sister’s son,’ replied the youth. ‘I had the misfortune to
slay my father’s steward in a quarrel, and am forced to flee from home.’

“‘Thy name?’ asked Robin Hood anxiously.

“‘Is Will Gamwell, of the town of Maxwell,’ replied the stranger.

“‘My brave boy, I am thine uncle,’ exclaimed the outlaw, clasping him in
his arms with delight; ‘thou should’st have said this before we shed each
other’s blood.’

“‘Forgive me—forgive me,’—cried the youth, bending on his knee; ‘and I’ll
serve thee day and night.’

“‘Give me thy hand,’ replied Robin; ‘thou art a bold fellow, a true
marksman, and a right valiant swordsman, as I know to my cost. Let us go
seek my merry men.’ And with many a pleasant discourse the newly-found
relations beguiled their path to the haunt of the outlaws. As they
approached the spot, Robin Hood drew his bugle from his girdle, and
sounded a few short notes. Before the music had ceased Little John stood
at his side.

“‘Is danger at hand, good master?’ he said. ‘Where hast thou tarried so
long? Whence this blood?’

“‘I met with this youth,’ replied Robin Hood, ‘and full sore has he
beaten me.’

“‘Then I’ll have a bout with him,’ cried the tall forester, and see if
he will beat me too;’ and with a staff in his hand he stepped before the
stranger.

“‘Nay nay,’ said his captain, interfering, ‘that must not be; he is my
own dear sister’s son, and next to thee shall be my chief yeoman.’

“‘Welcome, my friend, to merry Sherwood,’ exclaimed Little John, shaking
the new comer by the hand. ‘We’ll have a rare feast for thee to-night.
But by what name shall we call thee among our jovial comrades?’

“‘His name is Gamwell,’ replied Robin Hood; ‘but we had better
re-christen him as we did thee; he has forsooth a fine scarlet doublet,
and Will Scarlet shall be his name.’ Then again taking his bugle, he set
it to his lips, and winded it till

    “‘The warbling echoes wak’d from every dale and hill.’

“More than a hundred tall yeomen, clad in Lincoln green, soon attended
this summons, bounding among the trees like so many playful deer.

“Will Scarlet, frightened at the sight of so many men, all armed with
bows, cried to his uncle to fly from them, and was himself starting off
at his full speed, when Robin Hood caught him by the arm, and laughing
heartily at his terror, bade him behold his future companions.

“‘What want’st thou, good master?’ said Will Stutely, the leader of the
band. ‘Thy bugle sounded so shrill we thought there had been work for us.’

“‘The danger’s over now,’ replied Robin Hood; ‘but welcome your new
comrade; he is my own sister’s son, and has proved himself a gallant
youth, for he has given me a famous beating.’

“The foresters set up a simultaneous shout, and each advancing in his
turn took the hand of the delighted youth. The rest of the day was spent
in feasting and sporting, till the departing rays of the sun warned them
to their caves and bowers.”

Just as I had thus concluded, and my young companions were making their
various remarks upon the merry life of the bold outlaws, the deep tone
of our school-bell rang in our ears. Off we started, like a herd of deer
frightened at the notes of Robin Hood’s bugle-horn.




OUR SECOND MEETING.


ROBIN HOOD AND ALLEN-A-DALE.

On the next evening, when I took my seat beneath the sycamore, I found
that it was surrounded by no less than six of my school-fellows; so
popular had been the legends of Robin Hood with my hearers of the
previous day. I was mightily pleased at this, and with renewed confidence
began the following tale:—

“Shortly after the accession of Will Scarlet to his company, Robin Hood
was one morning roaming through the forest, when he beheld a young man,
very elegantly dressed in crimson silk, skipping merrily over the green
plain, singing a roundelay; his face was lighted up with gladness, and
his heart seemed overflowing with joy.

“On the very next morning Robin Hood again encountered the same youth.
All his finery was gone. He wore a russet suit, and his countenance was
overspread with melancholy. He walked slowly, absorbed in meditation,
and now and then broke out into exclamations of the keenest grief. The
outlaw’s heart was moved. ‘What can have caused this sudden change,’ he
said to himself: ‘perhaps I may relieve his sorrows;’ and emerging from
the grove he stood before the young man’s path.

“‘What ailest thou my friend?’ he said to him; ‘but yesterday thou wert
as gay as a lark, and to-day as thou wert at a funeral.’

“‘Why dost thou ask?’ said the youth: ‘thou canst not help me in my
distress.’

“‘I have a hundred as good yeomen as ever drew bow in the green-wood,’
replied the outlaw, ‘that will do my bidding as I list.’

“‘Lend me thine aid,’ cried the young man eagerly, ‘and I’ll be thy true
servant for ever. My name is Allen-a-Dale. But yesterday I was to have
wedded the fairest maiden upon whom the sun ever shone. To-day she is
taken from me, and will be forced to marry a rich old knight whom she
detests.’

“‘Where is the wedding to take place,’ inquired Robin Hood.

“‘At the little church in the vale ’twixt here and Nottingham,’ replied
the lover; ‘’tis not five miles distant.’

“‘We will try what’s to be done,’ rejoined Robin. ‘Come with me, and by
my faith it shall go hard but thou gettest thy fair maiden yet;’ and
taking the now hopeful youth by the hand, the outlaw led him away.

“Great preparations were made for the approaching wedding in the village
church that Allen-a-Dale had mentioned. The lord bishop of the diocese
was there, dressed in his gorgeous robes; and the cottagers, decked out
in their holiday costume, were waiting anxiously to witness so grand a
marriage. An old man with a long flowing beard likewise demanded and
received admission into the interior of the sacred edifice. He wore a
sombre-coloured mantle that entirely covered him, and carried, slung by
a belt across his shoulders, a harp, which, as he seated himself near
the altar, he placed at his feet, ready to strike on the appearance of
the bridal party. Presently the grave old knight entered the church,
leading the beautiful damsel by the hand. Young girls, dressed in white,
scattered roses in their path as they advanced, and the harper sounded
his noble instrument. The poor maiden seemed totally unconscious of all
that passed. She walked slowly, with her head bent to the earth; and
tears burst from her eyes, and coursed each other down her lovely cheeks:
but the old knight was unmoved, and hurried her to the altar. The bishop
opened his book and began the ceremony.

“‘I forbid this match,’ exclaimed a voice that seemed to proceed from
where the harper sat.

“The reverend father, surprised at so unusual an interruption, stopped,
and looked around:—‘Stand forth, whoever thou art, and state thy
reasons,’ said he, after a long pause.

“‘This old knight is not the damsel’s free choice,’ cried the old man,
rising from his seat, ‘and I forbid the marriage.’ At the same moment
pulling away his false beard, and casting aside his cloak, ROBIN HOOD
drew a bugle-horn from his baldric, and stunned the ears of bishop,
knight, and maiden, with the loudness of his blast. At the summons four
and twenty yeomen darted out of a grove that was close at hand, bounded
like wild deer over the plain, and quickly entered the church. The first
man among them was Allen-a-Dale. He ran to Robin Hood, and gave him his
trusty bow; then, rushing to the altar, he hurled the old knight aside,
and clasping the lovely maiden in his arms, bore her to the outlaw.

“‘Now, my good lord bishop,’ said Robin Hood, ‘thou may’st marry this
fair lady to her own true love.’

“‘That cannot be,’ returned the bishop, closing his book with a loud
clap; ‘the law requireth that the banns be published three times in the
church.’

“‘We will soon remedy that,’ cried Little John, stepping forward from
among the bowmen. ‘Lend me thy gown awhile, good master bishop, and I
will do that office;’ and as he spake, he entered the enclosed space by
the altar, and stood by the side of the reverend father, who, with a very
ill will, suffered his robe to be taken from his person.

“The foresters and villagers, one and all, could not restrain their
mirth when the tall yeoman put the garment upon himself, and took up the
bishop’s volume. For fear that thrice might not be enough, he published
the banns seven times, while Allen-a-Dale and his betrothed took their
places at the altar steps.

“‘Who gives away this maid?’ asked Little John when he had finished that
part of his duty.

“‘That do I,’ answered Robin Hood, who stood at the damsel’s side.
‘Where’s the man who dares dispute my gift?’ and clapping the bridegroom
upon his shoulders—‘Cheer ye, my gallant friend,’ he cried; ‘by my troth
thou hast boldly won the fairest maiden in Christendom.’

“Neither the old knight nor the bishop interposed, but while Little John
proceeded with the ceremony they both left the church. As soon as all
was concluded, the young girls again strewed flowers in the path of the
now joyous bride, the bells struck up a merry peal, and the villagers
and foresters, rushing out of the church, greeted the happy pair with
loud shouts of joy. Robin Hood and his men escorted them home, and having
drunk to the welfare and happiness of young Allen-a-Dale and his fair
lady, they again returned to their green-wood shades.


ROBIN HOOD’S GOLDEN PRIZE.

“There were many days in which the outlaws of Sherwood scarcely knew
how to pass away their time. They often grew tired of their easy and
careless life, and longed for an adventure where more active exertions
would be required. Robin Hood, especially, could ill brook the monotony
of a forester’s life. He was ever bent upon some enterprise, either by
himself alone, or with the assistance of his followers; and rarely a week
passed but that the bold captain threw a good store of gold into his
treasury. One day he disguised himself in the dress of a friar. A long
dark-coloured gown completely covered his green doublet, and a large cowl
over his head nearly concealed his features. His waist was girt round
with a white woollen rope, from which were suspended a string of beads
and an ivory crucifix. Thus attired, with a staff in his hand, he took
the high road, and trudged on merrily. The first persons he met were,
an honest husbandman, clad in tattered garments, carrying a chubby boy
in his arms, and his wife, with an infant, following mournfully in his
steps. Robin Hood stopped them, inquired the cause of their grief, and
learned that their cottage had been burned down by a party of marauders,
and that they were then on their way to Nottingham, where the poor man
hoped to obtain employment.

“The seeming priest, moved with compassion at their forlorn state, drew
forth a broad piece of gold and gave it to the wanderers, who ever after
blessed the day they met the generous friar.

“Robin Hood walked on nearly a mile farther without meeting a single
traveller, when at last he espied two monks in black gowns coming towards
him, riding upon mules.

“‘Benedicite,’ said Robin Hood meekly, as they drew near him; ‘I pray ye,
holy brethren, have pity upon a poor wandering friar, who has neither
broken bread nor drank of the cup this day.’

“‘We are grieved, good brother,’ replied one of the monks, ‘we have not
so much as a penny. Robbers met us on the way, who have stripped us of
all our gold.’

“‘I fear thou tellest not the truth,’ returned the friar. ‘Wherefore did
they leave ye those beasts?’

“‘Now by’r lady,’ cried the second monk, ‘thou art an insolent fellow,’
and pushing on their mules he and his companion galloped off. The outlaw
laughed at their precipitate decampment, then starting off at his best
speed, he soon overtook them. ‘Brethren,’ he cried, as one after the
other he pulled them from their saddles, ‘since we have no money, let us
pray to our dear lady to send us some;’ and falling on his knees he made
the monks kneel down beside him. The old ballad says

    “‘The priests did pray, with mournful cheer,
      Sometimes their hands did wring,
    Sometimes they wept and cried aloud,
      Whilst Robin did merrily sing.’

“After some time thus spent, the outlaw rose. ‘Now, my brethren,’ quoth
he, ‘let us see what money has been sent us—we will all share alike;’ and
putting his hand in his pocket he pulled forth twenty pieces of gold,
and laid them on the grass. The monks fumbled a long time amid their
garments, but could find nothing.

“‘Let me search,’ cried the friar; ‘perchance ye have not hit upon the
right pocket.’ The monks reluctantly consented, and presently the outlaw
drew forth two purses, and counted out five hundred golden crowns.

    “‘Here is a brave show,’ said Robin Hood,
      ‘Such store of gold to see;
    And ye shall each of ye have a part
      ’Cause you prayed so heartily.’

“He then gave them back each fifty pieces, which the monks eagerly
seized, and running to the side of their mules they were about to ride
off. ‘Stay,’ cried the outlaw; ‘two things ye must swear: first—that ye
will never tell lies again; and secondly—that ye will be charitable to
the poor.’ The priests fell on their knees and gave the required promise
to Robin Hood, and then

    “‘He set them on their beasts again,
      And away then they did ride;
    And he returned to the merry green-wood
      With great joy, mirth, and pride.’”

“Can you remember the whole of any ballad?” asked one of my hearers. “If
you could I should like very much to hear it.”

“And so should I.”—“And I.”—“And I.”—cried two or three other voices.

“I fear there will be some parts that you will scarcely understand,” I
replied; “but as you wish it, you shall hear of


ROBIN HOOD AND THE RANGER; OR, TRUE FRIENDSHIP AFTER A FIERCE FIGHT.

    “When Phœbus had melted the ‘sickles’ of ice,
      And likewise the mountains of snow,
    Bold Robin Hood he would ramble away,
      To frolic abroad with his bow.

    “He left all his merry men waiting behind,
      Whilst through the green valleys he pass’d,
    Where he did behold a forester bold,
      Who cry’d out, ‘Friend, whither so fast?’

    “I am going,’ quoth Robin, ‘to kill a fat buck,
      For me and my merry men all;
    Besides, ere I go, I’ll have a fat doe,
      Or else it shall cost me a fall.’

    “‘You’d best have a care,’ said the forester then,
      ‘For these are his majesty’s deer;
    Before you shall shoot, the thing I’ll dispute,
      For I am head forester here.’

    “‘These thirteen long summers,’ quoth Robin, ‘I’m sure,
      My arrows I here have let fly;
    Where freely I range, methinks it is strange
      You should have more power than I.

    “‘This forest,’ quoth Robin, ‘I think is my own,
      And so are the nimble deer too;
    Therefore I declare, and solemnly swear,
      I’ll not be affronted by you.’

    “The forester he had a long quarter staff,
      Likewise a broadsword by his side;
    Without more ado, he presently drew,
      Declaring the truth should be tried.

    “Bold Robin Hood had a sword of the best,
      Thus, ere he could take any wrong,
    His courage was flush, he’d venture a brush,
      And thus they fell to it ding dong.

    “The very first blow that the forester gave,
      He made his broad weapon cry twang;
    ’Twas over the head, he fell down for dead,
      O that was a terrible bang!

    “But Robin he soon recovered himself,
      And bravely fell to it again;
    The very next stroke their weapons they broke,
      Yet never a man there was slain.

    “At quarter staff then they resolved to play,
      Because they would have the other bout;
    And brave Robin Hood right valiantly stood;
      Unwilling he was to give out.

    “Bold Robin he gave him very hard blows,
      The other return’d them as fast;
    At every stroke their jackets did smoke;
      Three hours the combat did last.

    “At length in a rage the forester grew,
      And cudgel’d bold Robin so sore
    That he could not stand, so shaking his hand,
      He cry’d, ‘Let us freely give o’er.

    “‘Thou art a brave fellow, I needs must confess
      I never knew any so good;
    Thou art fitting to be a yeoman for me,
      And range in the merry green-wood.’

    “Robin Hood set his bugle horn to his mouth,
      A blast then he merrily blows;
    His yeomen did hear, and straight did appear
      A hundred with trusty long bows.

    “Now Little John came at the head of them all,
      Cloth’d in a rich mantle of green;
    And likewise the rest were gloriously drest,
      A delicate sight to be seen!

    “‘Lo! these are my yeomen,’ said bold Robin Hood,
      ‘And thou shalt be one of the train,
    A mantle and bow, and quiver also,
      I give them whom I entertain.’

    “The forester willingly entered the list,
      They were such a beautiful sight;
    Then with a long bow they shot a fat doe,
      And made a rich supper that night,

    “What singing and dancing was in the green-wood,
      For joy of another new mate!
    With might and delight they spent all the night,
      And liv’d at a plentiful rate.

    “Quoth he, ‘My brave yeomen, be true to your trust,
      And then we may range the woods wide.’
    They all did declare, and solemnly swear,
      They would conquer, or die by his side.”

This ballad was highly approved of; and when, as usual, a few remarks had
been made upon the valour of the champions, I resumed my tales, and told
of


ROBIN HOOD AND GUY OF GISBORNE.

“How delightful are the woods upon a summer’s morn. The bright foliage
of the trees now shines in its deepest verdure; the lawns and glades
are clothed with luxuriant grass and sweet wild flowers, upon which the
dew-drops glisten in the rising sun. The merry birds sitting upon the
tender branches pour forth their morning lays; and yon lark, now soaring
high towards the blue expanse of heaven, makes hill and dale re-echo
with her melodious carol;—all telling of the goodness of their Creator,
and praising him for his wondrous works. Thus thought Robin Hood as, on
a bright morning in the pleasant month of June, he wandered amid the
trees of Barnesdale. He had been awakened earlier than usual from his
slumbers by the loud and incessant singing of a golden thrush: he arose,
and rambled forth, enjoying the freshness of the morning breeze, and the
sweet music that was borne upon it. Many a hart darted across his path,
and many a young fawn skipped playfully at his side, and then bounded
into the recesses of the forest. At another time the outlaw’s keen arrow
would have followed them, but now he smiled at their merry gambols, and
charmed with the loveliness of the scene, he rested upon his bow, and
contemplated with heart-felt pleasure the tranquil beauty of the morn.
He continued thus, absorbed in meditation, when suddenly a distant sound
broke upon the stillness of the air.

“The outlaw listened for a moment. ‘’Tis the tramp of horses,’ he
whispered to himself; and stepping to a tree, quick as thought he
climbed amid its branches. Thence he could plainly distinguish the
glitter of spear-heads and bright helmets, and scarce had he secured
himself from observation, when several horsemen, followed by a troop of
soldiers, passed within a few yards of his hiding-place. In the leader,
Robin Hood at once recognised his old friend, the sheriff of Nottingham,
who he had no doubt was now come with his men to seek for the traitorous
butcher of Sherwood.

“It was not till some time after this little band had gone by that the
outlaw ventured to descend the tree; and then, striking into a narrow
path, he endeavoured to retrace his steps to the spot where his men were
dwelling. On his way he was obliged to cross the high road, where a
stranger arrested his steps.

“‘Hast thou seen the sheriff of Nottingham in the forest?’ he inquired.

“‘Aye, my good fellow, and with a fine band at his tail,’ replied Robin
Hood. ‘Art thou seeking him?’

“‘Not him,’ returned the stranger, who was a bold yeoman, dressed in a
coat of the untanned skin of some wild beast, and who carried a bow in
his hand, and a sword and dagger at his side. ‘I seek not the sheriff,
but him whom he seeks.’

“‘And who may that be?’ said the forester, at the same time forming a
pretty shrewd guess.

“‘A man they call Robin Hood,’ answered the stranger. ‘If thou canst show
me where he is, this purse shall be thine;’ and taking a well-filled
leathern bag from his girdle, he rattled the contents together.

“‘Come with me, my friend, and thou shalt soon see Robin Hood,’ returned
the outlaw. ‘But thou hast a brave bow; wilt thou not try thy skill
with me in archery?’ The stranger at once consented. Robin Hood with
his dagger cut down the branch of a tree, and fixing it in the earth,
suspended upon the top a little garland, which he entwined with the long
grass. The archers took their station at the distance of three hundred
yards, and the stranger drew the first bow. His arrow flew past the mark
far too high. The outlaw next bent his weapon, and shot within an inch
or two of the stick. Again the yeoman essayed; and this time his shaft
flew straight and passed through the garland; but Robin Hood stepped
up boldly, and drawing his arrow to the very head, shot it with such
vehemence that it clave the branch into two pieces, and still flew
onwards for some yards.

“‘Give me thy hand,’ cried the stranger,—‘thou’rt the bravest bowman
I’ve seen for many a day, an thy heart be as true as thy aim, thou art a
better man than Robin Hood. What name bearest thou?’

“‘Nay—first tell me thine,’ replied Robin, ‘and then by my faith I will
answer thee.’

“‘They call me Guy of Gisborne,’ rejoined the yeoman. ‘I’m one of the
king’s rangers; and am sworn to take that outlawed traitor, Robin Hood.’

“‘He’s no traitor, sirrah,’ returned the forester angrily; ‘and cares as
much for thee as for the beast whose skin thou wearest. I am that outlaw
whom thou seek’st,—I am Robin Hood:’ and in a moment his drawn sword was
in his hand.

“‘That’s for thee then,’ cried the yeoman, striking fiercely. ‘Five
hundred pounds are set upon thine head, and if I get it not I’ll lose
mine own.’

[Illustration: ROBIN HOOD & GUY OF GISBORNE

J. Gilbert]

“Robin Hood intercepted the intended blow, and fought skillfully with his
fiery and more athletic antagonist, who poured down an incessant shower
of strokes upon him. Once the bold outlaw fell; but recovering himself
sufficiently to place a foot upon the earth, he thrust his sword at the
ranger, and as he drew back to avoid it, Robin Hood sprung up, and with
one sudden back-handed stroke slew poor Guy of Gisborne upon the spot.
He immediately stripped off the hide from the dead man, upon whom he put
his own green mantle; and then taking his unfortunate opponent’s bow and
arrows and bugle-horn, he drew him into a thicket, and darted off swiftly
to assist his men.

“In the mean while the sheriff of Nottingham and his attendants had
pushed their way through the woods to Barnesdale, where they had been
informed the outlaw was lying.

“The bold foresters, ever on the alert, heard the unusual sound of the
tramp of armed men, and with their bugles gave notice to each other of
the danger. Little John had been in pursuit of a fat doe, which he was
bringing home upon his shoulders, when the warning sounded upon his ears.
Concealing his booty among the underwood, he bounded through the forest
to the scene of danger, where he found that Will Stutely and many of
his comrades were urging their utmost speed to escape from some of the
sheriff’s men, and two bold foresters lying dead upon the grass. Little
John’s wrath was kindled. Forgetful of the imprudence of the action, he
drew his bow, and let fly an arrow at the cause of this mischief, but
the treacherous weapon brake in his hand, and the shaft flew wide of the
sheriff, but striking one of his followers stretched him lifeless upon
the turf.

“Left almost defenceless by the loss of his bow, Little John could make
but a poor resistance to the crowd of men who instantly surrounded him.
By the sheriff’s order he was bound hand and foot, and tied to a young
oak, receiving at the same time a promise that so soon as more of his
comrades were taken he should with them be hanged on the highest tree in
Barnesdale. Just then a loud blast from a bugle rang through the wood.

“‘Here comes good Guy of Gisborne,’ quoth the sheriff; ‘and by his blast
I know that he hath slain that bold knave, Robin Hood. Come hither, good
Guy,’ he continued as the outlaw appeared, effectually concealed in the
yeoman’s clothing. ‘What reward wilt thou have of me?’

“‘I must finish my work first, good master sheriff,’ replied the
disguised hero. ‘I’ve slain the master, and now I must kill the knave;
but ’twere cruel ere he has confessed his sins.’

“‘Thou’rt a pretty fellow truly to turn father-confessor,’ replied the
sheriff; ‘but go, do as thou list, only be quick about it.’

“The outlaw stepped to the side of Little John,—who had easily recognised
his beloved master’s voice,—and pretended to listen attentively to what
the poor captive might be saying, but drawing his dagger, he gently cut
the cords that bound his comrade, and gave him the bow and arrow that he
had taken from Guy of Gisborne.

“Robin Hood then placed his own bugle to his lips and sounded a
peculiarly shrill blast, that rung in the sheriff’s ears as a death
knell, so well did he remember the sound. The two outlaws were quickly
supported by a band of sixty foresters, who had collected together, and
all drew their bows at once against the intruders. A dense flight of
arrows fell upon them. Those who were not too badly wounded immediately
set spurs to their horses, or took to their heels in the most abrupt
confusion. One poor forester, Will Stutely, they bore off with them.
Robin Hood and his men pursued, and it was not till they had got half
way on their road back to Nottingham that the defeated sheriff and his
attendants drew rein.


THE CAPTURE OF WILL STUTELY.

“Robin Hood was sorely grieved when he learned that his bold follower had
been carried off. Calling his men together, he made them swear that they
would rescue their brave comrade, or die in the attempt. Will Scarlet was
despatched at once to learn to what place he was taken; and hastening
with all speed to Nottingham, he found that the news of the terrible
affray, and the sheriff’s precipitate flight, had already caused a great
sensation among the gossips of the town. From them he easily ascertained
that the captive outlaw was imprisoned in the castle, and that he was to
be hanged on the following morning at sun-rise. Scarlet flew back with
this intelligence to Robin Hood, who communicated it to his men, and all
again swore to bring Will Stutely safely back to Barnesdale, or fearfully
avenge his death.

“Early on the morning after his capture, the unfortunate prisoner,
tightly bound and guarded on every side, was led from his cell towards
the gallows that had been erected on the plain in front of the castle.
He cast his eyes anxiously around, in the hope that succour might be at
hand, but he could perceive no signs of the presence of his comrades.
Turning to the sheriff, who attended in person at the execution of so
notorious an outlaw,

“‘Grant me one boon, I pray thee,’ cried he; ‘never has one of Robin
Hood’s men died like a thief; let me not be the first. Give me my good
sword in my hand, and do ye all set upon me. I shall then die as a brave
man should.’

“‘I’ve sworn to hang thee on the highest gallows in Nottingham,’ replied
the sheriff; ‘and when I catch that still greater villain, Robin Hood, he
shall dance by thy side.’

“‘Thou’rt a dastard coward!’ cried Stutely in a rage, ‘a faint-hearted
peasant slave! By’r lady, if e’er thou meet’st bold Robin Hood, thou’lt
have payment for the deed thou’rt doing. He scorns and despises thee,
and all thy cowardly crew, who will as soon take King Henry prisoner as
brave Robin Hood;’ and the forester laughed loudly in defiance.

“At the sheriff’s command the executioner seized him by the arms, and
hurried him to the fatal tree; he was just about to affix the rope, when
a tall yeoman leaped out of an adjacent bush, and with a stroke of his
sword felled the officer to the earth.

“‘I’m come to take leave of thee, Will, before thou diest,’ cried the
intruder; ‘and, good master sheriff, thou must spare him to me awhile.’”

“‘As I live,’ cried the sheriff, to his attendants, ‘yon varlet’s a rebel
too, and one of Robin Hood’s men,—seize him—five pounds for his head,
dead or alive.’ But, in a moment, Little John, for he it was, cut the
bonds that secured his comrade, and snatching a sword from one of the
soldiers, gave it him, shouting, ‘Fight, Will, defend thyself, man—Help
is near.—To the rescue—To the rescue.’—And turning back to back, the two
outlaws gallantly parried the attacks of their assailants.

“‘To the rescue! To the rescue!’ echoed a host of voices from a
neighbouring wood; and Robin Hood, with seven-score men, bounded across
the green plain. A flight of arrows from their bows rattled upon the
armour of the soldiers, and more than one stuck into the sheriff’s robe.

“‘Away, my men, away!’ cried he, flying to the castle for shelter. ‘’Tis
Robin Hood himself;’ and the knowledge that the outlaw would especially
choose him for a mark added wings to the speed of the valiant sheriff.
His men—nothing loth to follow such an example, vied with each other in
the race, so greatly to the amusement of the merry outlaws that they
could not for laughter discharge an arrow in pursuit of them.

“‘I little thought, good master, to have seen thy face again,’ said Will
Stutely; ‘and to thee, my bold comrade,’ he added, addressing Little
John, ‘to thee I owe my best thanks. ’Twill be a long day ere Will
Stutely forgets thy kindness.’

“‘May we ever thus support each other in danger,’ said Robin Hood, loud
enough for the whole band to hear him. ‘But, my brave yeomen, we must
away, or we shall have the whole nest of hornets about our ears;’ and,
with many a laugh at the sudden flight of the sheriff, and the glorious
rescue of one of their favourite companions, the bold foresters plunged
again into the woods and returned to Barnesdale, where they celebrated
the joyful occasion with feasting and music, till the stars glittering
through the topmost branches of the trees warned them that the hour of
rest was at hand.


ROBIN HOOD AND THE BEGGAR

“For some long time after this last daring adventure, Robin Hood and his
men were so hotly pressed by the sheriff that it was with difficulty that
they eluded the pursuit. Now concealing themselves in the recesses of
a cavern, now in the thickest coverts of the forest, they were obliged
almost daily to change their abode, until at last, tired of the incessant
chase, the sheriff disbanded his forces and returned to Nottingham.

“When the outlaws were well assured of this, they quickly came back to
their old haunts in Barnesdale and Sherwood, and pursued their usual
course of life. One evening Robin Hood was roving through the woods, when
he espied a sturdy-looking beggar, clad in an old patched cloak, come
jogging along. In his hand he carried a thick oaken staff, with which he
assisted himself in walking, and round his neck a well-filled meal-bag
was suspended by a broad leathern belt, while three steeple crowned hats
placed within each other, sheltered his bald pate from the rain and snow.

“‘Stay, good friend,’ said Robin Hood to him as they met; ‘thou seem’st
in haste to-night.’

“‘I’ve far to go yet,’ answered the beggar, still pushing onwards, ‘and
should look foolish enough to get to my lodging house when all the
supper’s done.’

“‘Ay! ay!’ returned Robin Hood, walking by his side. ‘So long as thou
fillest thine own mouth, thou carest but little about mine. Lend me some
money, my friend, till we meet again. I’ve not dined yet, and my credit
at the tavern is but indifferent.’

“‘If thou fastest till I give thee money,’ replied the mendicant,
‘thou’lt eat nothing this year. Thou’rt a younger man than I am, and
ought to work:’ and the old fellow pushed on still more briskly.

“‘Now, by my troth, thou’rt but a churl,’ cried the outlaw. ‘If thou hast
but one farthing in thy pouch, ’tshall part company with thee before I
go. Off with thy ragged cloak, and let’s see what treasures it conceals,
or I’ll make a window in it with my good broad arrows.’

“‘Dost think I care for wee bits of sticks like them?’ said the beggar,
laughing; ‘they’re fit for nothing but skewers for a housewife’s
pudding-bag.’ Robin Hood drew back a pace or two, and fitted an arrow
to his bow-string, but before he could let it fly the beggar swung his
staff round his head, and with one stroke splintered bow and arrow into
twenty pieces. The outlaw drew his sword, and was about to repay this
with interest, when a second blow from the old man’s stick lighted upon
his wrist, and so great was the pain it caused that his blade fell
involuntarily from his grasp. Poor Robin Hood was now completely in the
beggar’s power;—

    “‘He could not fight—he could not flee,—
      He wist not what to do;
    The beggar, with his noble tree,
      Laid lusty slaps him to.

    “‘He paid good Robin back and side,
      And baste him up and down;
    And with his pike-staff laid on loud,
      Till he fell in a swoon.’

“‘Stand up, man,’ cried the beggar jeeringly, ‘’tis hardly bed-time yet.
Count thy money, man—buy ale and wine with it, and give thy friends a
jovial carouse. How they’ll laugh at the poor beggar.’

“Robin Hood answered not a word, but lay still as a stone; his cheeks
pale as ashes, and his eyes closed. The beggar gave him a parting thwack,
and thinking that he had killed the saucy highwayman, went boldly on his
way.

“It fortunately happened that Will Scarlet and two of his comrades
were soon after passing by, and seeing a man lying by the road-side,
apparently dead, walked up to him. What was their consternation and grief
when they beheld their loved chief weltering in his blood. Will Scarlet
bended upon one knee, and raised his master’s head upon the other. One
forester ran to a brook that flowed close by, and brought back his cap
filled with water, which they sprinkled upon his face, and his companion
drew from his pouch a little leathern bottle, the contents of which
speedily revived the unfortunate outlaw.

“‘Tell us, dear master,’ exclaimed Will Scarlet, ‘who has done this?’

“Robin Hood sighed deeply. ‘I’ve roved in these woods for many years,’ he
said, ‘but never have I been so hard beset as on this day. A beggar with
an old patched cloak, for whom I would not have given a straw, has so
hasted my back with his pike-staff that it will be many a day ere Robin
Hood will lead his merry men again.—See! see!’ he added as he raised his
head;—‘there goes the man, on yonder hill, with three hats upon his head.
My friends,—if you love your master,—go and revenge this deed;—bring him
back to me, and let me see with mine own eyes the punishment you’ll give
him.’

“‘One of us shall remain with thee,’ replied Will; ‘thou’rt ill at ease.
The other two will quickly bring back yon evil-minded miscreant.’

“‘Nay, nay,’ returned the discomfited outlaw; ‘by my troth ye will have
enough to do if he once get scope for that villanous staff of his.—Go,
all of ye,—seize him suddenly—bind him fast, and bring him here, that I
may repay him for these hard blows that he has given me.’

“Will Scarlet and his two companions started off as fast as they could
run, dashing onward through many a miry pool, and over many a tiring
hill, until they arrived at a part of the road that wound through the
forest by a way at least a mile and a half nearer than the beaten path
that the beggar had taken. There was a dense copse of trees in the
bottom of a valley through which a little brook gently streamed, and
the road-way ran close to it. The foresters, well acquainted with every
acre of the ground which they so often traversed, took advantage of this
grove, and concealed themselves behind the well covered branches. In
the mean while the old beggar rejoicing in the victory he had so lately
obtained, walked sturdily on, as briskly as age and his weary limbs would
allow him. He passed by the copse without the least suspicion of lurking
danger, but had proceeded only a step or two farther when his staff was
violently seized by one of the foresters, and a dagger was pointed to his
breast, with threats of vengeance if he resisted.

“‘Oh! spare my life,’ cried the beggar, at once relinquishing his hold,
‘and take away that ugly knife. What have I done to deserve this? I am
but a poor beggar, who has never wronged thee or thine.’

“‘Thou liest, false carle,’ replied Will, ‘thou hast well nigh slain
the noblest man that e’er trod the forest grass. Back shalt thou go to
him, and before yon sun sinks down thy carcase shall be dangling from the
highest tree in Barnesdale.’

“The beggar was sorely frightened at this terrible threat; he had lost
his only weapon, and his aged limbs were but a poor match against three
stout young men. He began to despair and to give himself up as lost, when
a thought struck him. ‘Brave gentlemen,’ he said, ‘why take ye a poor
man’s blood? ’Twill make ye none the richer. If ye will give me liberty,
and promise to do me no more harm, I have a hundred golden pounds in this
meal-bag, that shall be yours.’ The foresters whispered together and
determined to get the money first, come afterwards what might.

“‘Give us thy money,’ said Will, ‘and we’ll let thee go thy way.’ The
beggar unfastened the clasp of his belt, and taking it from his neck,
spread the meal-bag upon the grass, while the young men anxious for the
gold, bent over, eager to seize upon the expected prize. The old fellow
pretended to search very diligently at the bottom of the bag, and pulled
out a peck or two of meal, which he piled into a heap; then watching his
opportunity, he filled both hands full, and threw it violently in the
faces of the outlaws, who, blinded and astonished, began to rub their
eyes most woefully. The beggar sprung up in a moment, seized his staff,
and in a twinkling began to belabour their backs and shoulders.

“‘I have mealed your coats,’ he cried, ‘but I’ve a good pike-staff here
that will soon beat them clean again;’ and before the youths could
recover from their consternation the old man plied his staff so manfully
that his arm ached from the exertion, and he was obliged to stay for rest.

“The young outlaws did not attempt to retaliate; indeed they could not
see where to strike; but trusting to their swiftness, scampered away even
more briskly than they had come; and the beggar laughing at the success
of his wile, plunged into the woods, and made the best of his way from
Barnesdale forest.

“When Will Scarlet and his comrades presented themselves before Robin
Hood, the bold outlaw, ill as he was, could not refrain from bursting
into laughter at their sheepish appearance. They hung down their heads,
and still rubbed their eyes, while the meal on their coats made known
the trick that had been played upon them.

“‘What have ye done with the bold beggar?’ inquired Robin Hood; ‘surely
three of ye were a match for him.’ Will Scarlet replied; told him of
their first success, and the old man’s promise of money; but when he came
to the meal and the drubbing they had received, Robin Hood laughed till
his bruised limbs ached. Although he would fain have revenged himself
upon his opponent, yet the cleverness of the trick so pleased his fancy
that he swore that if ever he met the sturdy beggar again, he would, by
fair means or foul, make him join his band in merry Barnesdale.”

This tale was frequently interrupted with the loud laughter of my
hearers, who all praised the dexterity of the old beggar-man.




THE THIRD EVENING.


THE OUTLAW’S SPORTS.

Upon the next evening that we met together I found my school-fellows
waiting for me under the old tree, and taking my usual seat, I
immediately began:—

“Many a gay meadow bedecked with daisies and buttercups stretches its
verdant surface by the banks of the fair river Trent; and many a wood
filled with merry birds lines its brink so closely that the pendent
branches of the trees lave themselves in its transparent waters. It was
upon the evening of a lovely day in spring, when every flower looked
fresh and beautiful, and the early leaves of the forest shone in their
brightest green tint, that a party of young men emerging upon one of
these meadows from the surrounding woods, began to amuse themselves in
the athletic exercises in which our forefathers so much delighted.
Some of them struck slight branches into the earth, and placing a pole
transversely upon them, leaped over it at nearly their own height from
the ground. Presently a signal was given, and four or five youths bounded
across the lawn with the speed of young stags, vieing with each other in
the first attainment of the solitary elm that graced the centre of the
meadow. High swelled the bosom of the victor as, breathless and panting,
he received the reward of his achievement, perhaps a new scarlet cap, or
a bright new girdle, and proud was he to know that the chief to whom he
had sworn allegiance beheld and smiled approvingly on his success.

“But now a more important contest began. One of the foresters stood
forward, and fixed up a target, the face of which was rudely painted in
circles of various colours, a small white spot serving as a centre. A
line was drawn at the distance of five hundred feet from this mark, near
which about twenty bowmen took their station; one after another each
stept up to it, bent his bow, and let fly an arrow with all the force he
could command. Many shafts had flown far wide of the target, and some few
had struck it near the side, when the turn arrived for a gaily-dressed
archer to make his trial. Walking deliberately to the line, he very
carefully placed his arrow upon the bow-string, raised it till it was on
a level with his ear, and instantly discharged it. The quivering shaft
sank deeply within two inches of the white centre.

“‘Bravely done, Will Scarlet,’ exclaimed a forester who stood apart from
the rest, and who evidently controlled their movements; ‘thou’lt soon
become as good a bowman as e’er trod the green-wood.’

“‘I do my best, good master,’ replied Will to Robin Hood, who had taken
advantage of the cool evening, in order to exercise his men; ‘but here
is one whom I fear I scarcely equal:’ and a bold forester, who was known
to his companions by the cognomen of ‘Much, the Miller’s Son,’ stood
forward, and drew his bow. The nicely-balanced arrow shot swift as
lightning through the air, and pierced the very centre of the target.
A loud huzza followed this achievement, and Robin Hood himself shouted
louder than the rest. In a moment after all was hushed, for the tall
forester, brave Little John, took the last turn, and his comrades,
knowing well his dexterity, breathlessly awaited the result of the
contest. After carefully selecting a well-feathered arrow, he stood
erect as a young tree, drew back his bow-string with the strength of a
giant, and suddenly let it slip. For a minute or two no one could tell
where the arrow had gone; it was just possible to trace its flight as it
whizzed through the air, but it was not to be seen on the target. Little
John, smiling as he beheld the looks of surprise, ran swiftly across the
intervening space, and, to their astonishment, drew forth his shaft from
out of that of the miller’s, which it had struck, and cloven about half
way down.

“Robin Hood and his followers shouted with rapture, and the victor
bending upon one knee, received from his master, as a reward for his
prowess, a beautiful arrow of silver.

“‘By my troth,’ said the outlaw, as he gave it to him, ‘I would ride a
hundred miles, any day, to find an archer like thee.’

“‘Thou’st no need to go so far,’ cried Will Scarlet, rather envious of
the better success of his companions. ‘There’s a friar in Fountains’ Dale
that will bend a bow against him or thee, ay, or against all thy men.’

“‘I’ll neither eat nor drink till I find him,’ said the bold outlaw.
‘’Tis too late to seek him this evening, but ere I break my fast
to-morrow I’ll see this valiant friar.’ And as he spake he drew an arrow
from his quiver, and fixed it upon his bow-string.

“A young hart had innocently trotted forth from the shelter of the woods,
and was making its way towards the brink of the river, when the noise of
the foresters reached its ear. Startled at the sound, the creature turned
its pretty head, gazed for a moment, and, frightened at the unaccustomed
scene, bounded at full speed back towards the concealment of the forest.
The outlaw’s keen eye had followed its motions, and wishing to display
the superiority of his skill, he let fly an arrow at it while in its
swiftest flight; the poor fawn immediately dropped, although the distance
between it and the archer was, at the least, a quarter of a mile.

“‘Dost think the friar of Fountains’ Abbey will beat that?’ asked Robin
Hood as he slackened his bow-string.

“‘Ay marry, that will he,’ replied Will Scarlet; ‘many’s the buck he has
killed at half a mile.’

“‘I’ll never draw bow again,’ returned the chief, ‘if a lazy friar once
beats me in archery. What say ye, my friends, shall we find out this
gallant priest?’

“‘Make him join us,’ cried several voices.

“‘To-morrow at earliest dawn be ready to attend me,’ said Robin Hood; and
with Little John by his side, he left the meadow.

“The foresters then parted into groups and strolled away, some to the
banks of the stream, others to the darkening woods, while a few, not yet
content as to their inferiority, sought again to try their speed against
the victors.


ROBIN HOOD AND THE FRIAR.

“Upon the next morning, ere the sun had risen above the horizon, Robin
Hood started from his couch, and armed himself. He put on his helmet and
breast-plate, he took up his good broadsword, his long tried buckler,
and his trustiest bow, and then placing his bugle-horn to his lips, he
played so loud a _réveille_ that his men, frightened from their slumbers,
seized their nearest weapons, as if an army had appeared against them.
A few gentler notes made them remember the appointed time, and soon
fifty bold youths attended the summons of their master. He bade them
hasten to Fountains’ Dale by the shortest path, but on no account to show
themselves till he had sounded three blasts upon his bugle; and with a
light foot and merry heart he sprang into his horse’s saddle, and set out
to encounter the renowned friar.

“This friar, whose fame was spread far and wide, had once been an inmate
and one of the brethren of Fountains’ Abbey, but his irregular course
of life and lawless pursuits had brought down upon him the wrath of
the superior, and he had been expelled. Friar Tuck, so was he called,
bore his disgrace boldly; he immediately retired to the forests, and
there built himself a rude hut of the large stones with which the
country abounded, thatching it with branches of trees. There he lived
in solitude, gaining from the country people, who frequently came to
him for religious consolation, a character of the greatest sanctity.
The friar took care to turn this to his advantage, and many were the
presents of butter, milk, and sometimes of a more enlivening liquid, that
he received. But these did not constitute his chief means of livelihood;
early in the morning the friar had more than once been seen with a good
long bow in his hand, and a quiver of arrows at his side, and a report
had gone abroad that few could equal him in the use of this favourite
weapon.

“The friar was a tall burly man, at least six feet high, with a broad
expanded chest, and a muscular arm that the sturdiest blacksmith might
have been proud of. He usually wore a dark mulberry coloured cloak that
reached nearly to his ancles, and girded it with a black woollen rope,
the two ends of which hung down before him, about half a yard in length.
On the morning upon which Robin Hood had determined to discover him, from
some unaccountable reason friar Tuck had put a steel cap upon his head,
and a corslet upon his breast, and with his long oaken staff in his hand
had rambled to the margin of the fair river Skell, where he stood gazing
steadfastly upon the waves, as they rippled by. Presently he heard the
sound of a horse’s step, and turning, he beheld within a few feet of him
an armed horseman. The stranger quickly dismounted, and fastening his
steed by his bridle, to the branch of a tree, advanced towards him.

“‘Art thou the Friar of Fountains’ Abbey?’ he asked, when each had
regarded the other in silence for a short space.

“‘They that speak of me call me so,’ replied the priest; ‘why dost thou
seek me?’

“‘Carry me over this stream, thou burly friar, and I will tell thee,’
replied Robin Hood. The priest, without a word, tucked up his garments to
the waist, took the daring outlaw upon his back, and gravely waded across
the stream. Robin Hood leaped off lightly upon the opposite bank.

“‘Now do thou carry me back, thou gay gallant,’ said the friar. The
outlaw stooped, took him upon his shoulders, and with great difficulty
bore his weighty burden across.

“‘Now by my faith thou’rt double the weight that I am,’ cried Robin Hood
as the priest alighted, ‘and I’ll have two rides to thy one.’ The friar
did not answer, but taking up the merry forester again, bore him to the
middle of the stream, and bending down, pitched him headlong into the
water.

“‘Choose thee, my fine fellow, whether thou’lt sink or swim!’ he said;
‘a morning bath will do thine health good.’ Robin Hood scrambled to the
bank, fitted an arrow to his bow, and let it fly at the treacherous
friar; but the wet had sodden both the bow-string and the feathers of the
shaft, and it flew far wide. The priest not wishing to stand a second
trial, flourished his staff and knocked the bow from the grasp of the
forester, who quickly drew his sword and retaliated by severely wounding
his vigorous opponent upon the shoulder. The friar at this grew wrathful,
and returned a most terrible thwack upon the outlaw’s head. Blow followed
upon blow; now the thick oaken staff beat down the less weighty but more
deadly weapon, and again the sharp edge of the sword drank blood. They
fought thus for more than an hour, and each began to weary of such warm
work before breakfast.

“‘A boon, a boon,’ cried Robin Hood, retiring from the contest. ‘Give me
leave to sound three blasts upon my bugle-horn.’

[Illustration: ROBIN HOOD & THE FRIAR

J. Gilbert]

“‘Blow till thy cheeks crack,’ returned the friar. ‘Think’st thou I fear
a bugle blast?’ The outlaw sounded the horn thrice, so loudly that the
friar clapped his hands to his ears, and beat a retreat for several
yards. The signal was immediately returned, and apparently from close at
hand. In two minutes more a tall yeoman leaped from the adjacent wood,
and followed by fifty young foresters, with bows ready in their hands,
ran to the side of their commander.

“‘Whose men are these?’ asked the friar, greatly surprised at this sudden
reinforcement.

“‘They’re Robin Hood’s bold foresters,’ said the outlaw; ‘and I am Robin
Hood. Wilt join our merry troop? Thou’rt the bravest friar that e’er wore
cowl, and if thou canst let fly an arrow as well as thou canst wield a
quarter-staff, thou’rt a match for my boldest man.’

“‘Let’s have a bout,’ said friar Tuck, unwilling to fight against such
odds as were opposed to him. ‘If there’s an archer here that can beat me
at the long-bow, I’ll be thy man. If I’m the best, swear that thou wilt
leave me free in mine own woods.’

“‘Agreed!’ cried the outlaw. ‘Stand forth, brave Little John, and for the
credit of Robin Hood choose thy truest shaft.’

“‘Ne’er fear me,’ replied the tall forester, as he carelessly advanced.
‘Shoot on, my brave fellow, and at what mark you may, only for St.
Hubert’s sake, let it be some five hundred feet or so from us.’

“‘Seest thou yon bird?’ said the friar, pointing to a hawk that, with
fluttering wings, hovered at a considerable height above a neighbouring
brake. ‘I will kill it. If thou canst strike it again ere it reaches the
earth, I’ll say thou art a better man than friar Tuck.’ Drawing an arrow
from his quiver, with apparent ease he shot the ill-fated bird, which
instantly fell to the earth, but not before a second shaft had transfixed
its body. A young forester darted away, and quickly returned with the
prize, when it appeared that the friar’s arrow had pinioned the hawk’s
wings to its sides, and that Little John’s had pierced through from its
breast to its back.

“‘Well done, my brave archers,’ cried the outlaws’ chief; ‘there’s many a
bowman in merry England would give his best weapon to shoot like ye. What
says my gallant friar? will he keep his promise?’

‘What I have said, that will I do,’ replied the priest; ‘but first I must
return to my hut, and possess myself of its valuable contents.’ Robin
Hood offered to accompany him, and dismissing his followers, he and the
friar by turns rode upon the horse, first to the hut and then to the
green woods of Sherwood.


ROBIN HOOD AND THE BISHOP OF HEREFORD.

“Robin Hood used frequently to disguise himself, and pay visits to the
neighbouring villages, in order to learn if any thing were going on in
which he might take a part. In one of these excursions, he overheard a
conversation between two priests, by which he learned that the bishop
of Hereford was expected to pass that way very shortly, upon a visit to
his holy brother, the archbishop of York. The outlaw lost no time in
ascertaining the route which the reverend father would travel, and with a
merry heart he hurried back to his followers in Sherwood forest. At the
sound of his well known bugle, two-score yeomen quickly surrounded him,
Little John and Will Scarlet among them.

“‘We shall have noble company to dine with us,’ said Robin Hood. ‘Kill
a good fat buck or two, and prepare a feast.’ Three or four foresters
quickly darted away to execute this commission.

“‘Who may it be, master,’ asked Little John, ‘that loves to be merry
under the green-wood tree?’

“‘Love or not love,’ cried the captain laughing, ‘a holy bishop dines
with us to-day, though he brings a dozen companions with him. But ’tis
time to meet his reverence. Do thou and Will Scarlet attend me, and thou
too,—and thou,—and thou,’—he added, tapping with his bow the heads of
three of his tallest followers, who most willingly and joyfully complied.

“The bishop of Hereford, as many bishops were in those days, was very
rich, very avaricious, and exceedingly tyrannical. By the nobles he
was regarded as a powerful prelate, and a support to the dignity of
the church; but the people looked upon him with fear, as a proud,
overbearing priest. Upon the occasion of his visit to his brother of
York, the bishop of Hereford rode on horseback, dressed in the white
robes of his sacred office; a massive gold chain was suspended round his
neck, supporting a golden crucifix, and in his right hand he carried his
crosier, of the same precious metal. His milk-white steed, also, was
richly caparisoned with silken trappings. The dean of Hereford, attired
in a plain black cassock, rode humbly by the side of his superior, who,
from time to time, deigned to hold converse with him upon the vanities
of this wicked world. Behind them, twenty horsemen, armed at all points,
with broad-swords by their sides and lances in rest, followed slowly
upon chargers of the jettest black, and three or four servants leading
sumpter mules closed the rear. Notwithstanding all this pompous array,
it was with many a misgiving that the bishop ventured to enter upon the
dangerous road through Sherwood forest.

“‘Holy brother,’ said he to the dean, ‘dost thou think that the man
called Robin Hood will dare to molest the Lord’s anointed, if perchance
he should have heard of our journeying?’

“‘They say, reverend father,’ replied the dean, ‘that he holds the holy
brethren of the church but cheaply, and pays but little respect to any of
our cloth. I would that we had taken a more circuitous route, and avoided
the paths of this wicked man.’

“‘It is too late to return now,’ said the bishop; ‘and have we not
twenty armed men to support us in the hour of trial!—Comfort ye, my
brother,—with this will I drive off the enemies of holy church;’ and as
he spake he flourished his crosier above his head. They had proceeded
but a short way farther, when they suddenly came upon six shepherds,
dancing merrily round a fire, with which they were cooking venison, by
the road-side.

“‘Ha!’ cried the bishop when he smelt the savoury odour that exhaled from
the roasting flesh. ‘Dare ye, villains as ye are, slay the king’s deer,
and cook it upon the open road? By St. Paul, ye shall answer for this.’

“‘Mercy! mercy! good bishop,’ cried one of the shepherds; ‘surely it
beseemeth not thy holy office to take away the lives of so many innocent
peasants.’

“‘Guards, seize these villains,’ cried the prelate, indignant at the
presumption of the serf;—‘away with them to York,—they shall be strung
on the highest gibbet in the city.’ The armed horsemen turned not
over-willingly against the offenders, and endeavoured to seize them, but
with a loud laugh they darted among the trees, where the steeds could not
possibly follow. Presently the shepherd who had begged for mercy pulled
from under his frock a little bugle-horn, and blew a short call upon it.
The bishop and his retinue started with affright, and had already begun
to urge on their horses, when they found themselves surrounded on every
side by archers, dressed in green, with bows drawn in their hands.

“‘Mercy! mercy!’ cried the bishop in great trepidation at the sight of
fifty or more arrows ready to pierce him through. ‘Have mercy upon an
unfortunate traveller.’

“‘Fear not, good father,’ replied Robin Hood, who was the shepherd that
had before spoken; ‘we do but crave thy worshipful company to dine with
us under the green-wood tree, and then, when thou hast paid the forest
toll, thou shalt depart in safety;’ and, stepping into the road, the bold
outlaw laid one hand upon the embossed bridle of the bishop’s steed, and
held the stirrup with the other.

“‘Oh! that we had but gone the outer road,’ groaned the bishop to his
holy brother; ‘we should have avoided these limbs of the evil one.’

“‘Nay, nay reverend father,’ cried Robin Hood, laughing at the poor
bishop’s rueful countenance; ‘call us not by so bad a name. We do but
take from the rich to administer to the necessities of the poor and if
we do now and then slay a fat buck or two, our good king will never know
his loss. But dismount, holy sir; and do ye, my friends, come likewise;
right merry shall we be with such a jovial company.’ The horsemen quickly
did as they were bidden, but the bishop most reluctantly unseated
himself, and with many a deep sigh obeyed the injunction of the outlaw.
Some of the foresters immediately seized the horses, and tied their
bridles to the lower branches of the trees; but the sumpter mules were
hurried away through the wood as quickly as the narrow foot-paths would
allow.

“At Robin Hood’s command, two young fellows took the unwilling bishop
between them upon their shoulders, and followed by the whole company,
bore him to their favourite lawn. A solitary beech tree, whose arms,
covered with thick foliage, extended far around, stood in the centre,
affording a delightful shade from the bright summer sun. Robin Hood
seated himself upon one of the twisted roots that grew above the surface
of the turf, and commanded that his visitor should be brought before him.
Little John, taking off his cap as he approached, gently led him to the
outlaw, while, to show his spite against him, one of the young foresters
had the audacity to tie the prelate’s arms behind his back.

“‘Thou art accused of deep crimes,’ exclaimed Robin Hood. ‘It is said
that thou dost gripe the poor man with a hard hand, and showest but
little mercy to the unfortunate. How answerest thou?’

“‘By what right, mean serf,’ replied the bishop, the blood rushing to his
temples, ‘dost thou question an anointed servant of the church?’

“‘Pax vobiscum,’ cried friar Tuck, coming forward, and folding his arms
in an attitude of defiance. ‘Wherefore not, good father? Answer boldly,
and swear by St. Paul that thou ne’er robbed the fatherless and the
widow.’

“‘What canting priest art thou?’ exclaimed the bishop. ‘For thine
insolence thou shall be expelled the church; thy gown shall be stripped
from thee, and thou shalt be branded as an impostor.’

“‘Save thyself the trouble,’ replied the friar, laughing. ‘The holy abbot
of Fountains’ Dale has forestalled thee in thy kind intentions.’

“‘Hold,’ cried Robin Hood, rising from his seat, ‘we’ll have no more of
these priestly quarrels. Reverend father, accompany us to our trysting
tree, and we’ll drink to thy speedy amendment.’ Then cutting his bonds
with a dagger, he took the hand of his unwilling guest, and led him to
the spot where they usually partook of their repasts.

“Upon the grass was spread a large cloth, covered with viands. Smoking
haunches of venison perfumed the air, and huge pasties baked in pewter
vessels, roasted wild swans, peacocks, and a host of minor dishes, filled
up any vacancies upon the cloth. At Robin Hood’s request, the bishop said
grace, and fifty or more foresters quickly seated themselves to partake
of this gallant feast. The prelate, for one in his situation, ate most
heartily. His merry host no sooner saw that his platter was empty than he
again filled it from the most savoury dishes. Wine flowed in abundance,
and when, in obedience to Robin Hood, every man filled his goblet to the
brim, and quaffed its contents to the health of the bishop of Hereford,
the good father for some moments quite forgot his misfortunes, and
striking his palm into the sinewy hand of Robin Hood, swore that he was
a jovial fellow.

[Illustration: THE BISHOP OF HEREFORD

J. Gilbert

Day & Haghe lithographers to the Queen]

“Many a ballad was then trolled forth by the foresters, and in the
excitement of the scene even the bishop ventured upon a stave; but, at
the moment he had concluded the first verse, his eye caught sight of one
of his mules, from whose back an outlaw was busily removing the trunk
that contained his treasure.

“‘Bring me the reckoning, good host,’ said he meekly, stopping short in
his song; ‘I would fain discharge it, and proceed upon my journey.’

“‘Lend me thy purse, good bishop,’ cried Little John, ‘and I will save
thee the trouble.’

“‘Take it,’ replied the prelate, throwing a very light bag of money to
the forester, ‘and give the surplus to the poor.’

“Little John opened the mouth of the purse, and emptied out ten golden
nobles upon the grass. ‘And dost thou think,’ he exclaimed, laughing
heartily at the owner’s rueful countenance,—‘dost thou think that a
bishop pays no more toll than this? Verily, reverend father, the meanest
farmer in Nottinghamshire readily grants us so poor a trifle. Ho there!’
he cried to the man who was disburthening the mules, ‘bring hither yonder
trunk.’ It was quickly brought, and with the help of a broadsword soon
opened. Little John first pulled out a handsome cloak, which he spread
upon the grass; a gown of the purest white lawn, an ermined robe, and a
golden mitre, were each brought forth in succession, and greatly admired
by the delighted foresters; but presently a clink of metal was heard,
and the bold robber drew forth a beautiful ivory casket. The point of a
dagger was in a moment applied to the fastening, and treasures invaluable
were revealed. The bishop, who had sat shivering with anxiety during the
search, now suddenly sprang to his feet with wonderful alacrity, and
would have seized his precious wealth, had not Robin Hood caught him by
the arm.

“‘Calm thyself, good father,’ said the outlaw; ‘do but fancy that
thou art distributing this gold in alms to the poor, and thou wilt
ne’er repent thee of thy charity.’ The bishop did not reply, but gazed
steadfastly on the glittering coin, the sparkling jewels, and the holy
beads, that Little John was exhibiting to his companions.

“‘Rouse ye, my merry men,’ cried the chief; ‘see ye not how sad ye have
made our reverend guest!’ A young man quickly brought a rude harp, upon
which he struck a lively air, and the gallant outlaw taking the bishop by
the hand, led him forth, followed by the foresters in pairs. The dance
commenced, and the poor prelate, unwilling to provoke his tormentors to
extremities, joined in the nimble step, which was prolonged till his
weary feet could no longer sustain their burden. The reverend father fell
fairly to the earth from sheer exhaustion.

“At Robin Hood’s bidding, the two young men again took the bishop upon
their shoulders, and bore him to the spot where his steed and those of
his retinue were fastened. They placed him upon his saddle, with his
face to the animal’s tail, and giving it him instead of the bridle, they
pricked the creature with their daggers, and started it off at full
gallop, the terrified rider clinging both with hands and knees to its
back. The dean, the armed horsemen, and the servants were allowed to
follow their superior in peace; but the sumpter mules and their burdens
were detained as payment for the feast that had been given to their
owners.”




OUR HALF-HOLIDAY.


THE WOOD.

It was, I remember, upon a Saturday afternoon that I was again asked
to tell a tale of Robin Hood. On this, the last day of our week of
seclusion, how great were the pleasures of our half-holiday! Frequently
we had permission granted us to stroll among the fields in the
neighbourhood; in the spring time, to gather the bright yellow primrose,
or search for the nests of the poor innocent birds; and, in the autumn
season, to pluck the delicious blackberries that, in some places,—and we
knew them well,—abounded among the thorny hedges.

At about the distance of a quarter of a mile from our old school-house
there was an extensive park. Many hundred acres of land were covered with
fine trees—oaks, elms, and firs, variously intermixed—while here and
there were open lawns, clothed only with grass and the beautiful wild
flowers, that spring up, unnurtured, in their native soil. An ancient
mansion stood in the midst, upon the summit of a hill, whence, looking
over the woods, the face of the country for miles around could be traced
as upon a map. The house was deserted—the owner resided in a foreign
land, and his noble English park was neglected: it had once been paled
round, but in many places the wooden staves were broken, and a gap made,
through which every passenger might enter. We often did, and chased each
other among the crowded thickets; and now, glad of the opportunity of
escaping from our confined play-ground, we repaired to this delightful
park, where, seated upon the grass, with my companions lying around me, I
told them the tale of


ROBIN HOOD IN FINSBURY FIELD.

“In the time of Henry the Second, and for many years afterwards, until
the use of gunpowder was known, the science of archery was greatly
encouraged in England among all ranks and classes; and even the good
citizens of London constantly exercised their bows in ‘Finsburie fielde.’

“The feast of St. Bartholomew was particularly celebrated by games of
this kind: a finely wrought bow or a golden arrow was given as a prize to
the best marksman, and the presence of the king and his court contributed
not a little to add interest to the long looked-for contests.

“One year, towards the close of King Henry’s reign, proclamation was as
usual made, that the ‘royal games of archery’ would be held in Finsbury
field, upon St. Bartholomew’s day. Queen Eleanor was passionately fond of
the sport, and rarely missed an opportunity of witnessing the superior
skill displayed by the royal archers. She had heard much of Robin Hood,
but had never seen that gallant outlaw; and as the fame of his rencontre
with the bishop of Hereford had spread far and wide, she felt a secret
desire to behold so daring and so celebrated a man. Summoning a young
page who waited her commands, she gave him a beautiful golden ring, and
bade him hasten with all speed to Sherwood forest, and deliver it to
the forester, with her request that he would come to London and take a
part in the approaching games. The youth lost no time in executing his
mistress’ command, and in two days arrived at Nottingham, where, from a
good yeoman, he learned the dwelling-place of Robin Hood, and on the next
morning he appeared before the bold outlaw. Falling gracefully upon one
knee, he doffed his cap, and presented the ring to him, saying,—‘My royal
and most gracious mistress, Eleanor, queen of England, greets thee well.
She bids thee haste with all speed to fair London court, that thou may’st
be her champion in the sports upon the feast of St. Bartholomew, in token
whereof accept this ring.’

“The outlaw took the royal present, and placed it upon his finger. ‘Rise,
my pretty page,’ he said; ‘wend thou back upon the fleetest steed that
thou canst find. Deliver this arrow to Queen Eleanor, and say that Robin
Hood will claim it ere three suns have set.’ The young page rose, placed
the arrow in his belt, and with much courtesy bade the outlaw adieu; then
hastening to his inn at Nottingham, he chose the swiftest horse in the
stables, and flew back again to his royal mistress.

“Early in the morning of St. Bartholomew’s day, Finsbury field presented
a gay and most enlivening scene. The large open space, which then
existed where streets and squares are now crowded together, was covered
with the good citizens of London and their wives and daughters, bedecked
in their newest holiday costume. Lists, three hundred yards in length,
were marked out in the centre of the field, and railed round, to prevent
the entrance of the spectators. At one end a scaffold was erected for the
accommodation of the king and queen and their attendants; it was hung
with green silk, emblazoned with the royal arms in gold, and covered
over with a beautiful bright blue cloth, spangled with silver stars.
Near it were tents pitched for the use of the contending bowmen, and
immediately opposite, at the far end of the lists, a broad target was
placed, with a large wooden screen behind it, to stop the flight of any
stray arrows that did not hit the mark. All were in busy expectation,—for
the royal party had not yet arrived,—and many were the wagers laid upon
the favourite archers of Finsbury. At length a blast of trumpets was
heard, and two heralds, dressed in glittering coats of golden tissue,
with emblazoned banners hanging from their spirit-stirring instruments,
entered the ground. The king, mounted on a barbed charger, and the queen
upon a milk-white palfrey, both magnificently caparisoned, then appeared,
amid the waving of caps, and the deafening acclamations of the assembled
thousands. Next followed, upon steeds of the purest white, a bevy of fair
ladies in attendance upon their royal mistress; and a band of knights and
gentlemen, well mounted and richly dressed, closed the procession.

“As soon as the royal party had alighted, and had taken their seats upon
the gallery, proclamation was made by sound of trumpet, that a tun of
the best Rhenish wine, and a hundred of the fattest harts that ran in
‘Dallom Chase,’ would be given to the truest marksman. The archers were
then ordered to advance to their posts, and a line was drawn upon which
they were to step when they discharged their arrows. Six bowmen appeared,
wearing the king’s livery, and marching to the gallery, they doffed their
caps to their royal master, and took their appointed station.

“‘Is there no one,’ asked King Henry aloud,—‘is there no bold forester to
oppose my gallant archers?’

“‘A boon, my liege,—a boon,’—cried Queen Eleanor. ‘Promise me by the
saint whose feast we celebrate, that whoever draws bow on my side shall
depart uninjured and free for forty days.’

“‘I grant thy boon, fair Eleanor,’ replied the king; ‘but who are these
gallant bowmen that require thine intercession?’

“‘Bid the heralds sound again,’ said Eleanor, ‘and thou shalt see them.’
The trumpets again played, and the challenge from the king’s archers was
repeated.

“‘The queen waved a light green scarf, and six tall yeomen entered
the lists, and advancing to the gallery, bowed lowly to their royal
patroness. One of them, evidently the commander of the little band, was
clothed in a rich scarlet doublet and trunk hose of the same bright
colour; a baldric of light blue silk, interwoven with threads of gold,
crossed his shoulder, supporting his quiver and a small golden bugle, and
in his hand he carried a most beautifully wrought bow. His companions
were dressed in the favourite Lincoln green, and like their commander,
each wore a black bonnet with a white streaming feather.

“‘Welcome, good Locksley,’ said the queen, addressing the yeoman in
scarlet. ‘Thou must draw thy best bow for Queen Eleanor;’ then turning
to the noblemen around her, ‘Who will support our brave party?’ she
asked. ‘My good lord bishop of Hereford, wilt thou not in gallantry be on
our side?’

“‘Thou hast six of the best archers of Finsbury to contend against,
gracious madam,’ replied the prelate, ‘and thy men are all strangers; we
know not if they can draw a bow-string.’

“‘Will your grace wager against us?’ asked Locksley of the bishop.

“‘Aye! by my mitre, willingly,’ returned the bishop rather warmly; ‘I’ll
wager a purse of gold against thee and thy whole band;’ and he drew forth
about fifty golden nobles. Locksley replied by throwing upon the turf
before the gallery a little bag containing at least an equal quantity of
the precious metal, and both stakes were given to the king as umpire of
the sport.

“The royal archers now took their station upon the line, and one after
another let fly an arrow at the broad target. ‘Why give us such a mark as
that?’ cried one of them, named Clifton, as his arrow pierced the centre.
‘We’ll shoot at the sun and moon. ‘Boldly said, my fine fellow,’ replied
Locksley as he drew his bow-string; ‘you and I will have a bout together
presently:’ and carelessly discharging his arrow, it quivered within a
hair’s breadth of his opponent’s. The spectators pleased at such fine
archery, shouted at the sight, but the king and the bishop of Hereford
could ill conceal their surprise and disappointment. Locksley’s men
followed, and each one’s arrow alighted within a few inches of the centre
of the target, but so had those of the royal archers.

“‘The game is equal,’ said the king, when he had mounted his horse and
galloped across the field; ‘ye must shoot again, my brave men. Finsbury
has ne’er before seen such archery as this.’

“‘If my gallant friend here,’ cried Locksley, ‘who aims at nothing less
than bringing down yon glorious sun, will but agree to the trial, he and
I might decide this contest between ourselves. That is,’ he continued,
‘with your majesty’s royal leave.’

“‘What say’st thou, Clifton? art thou content to stake thy reputation
against this braggart’s?’ asked King Henry.

“‘Right willingly, my liege,’ replied the archer; ‘I’ll lay my own
trusty bow against his, that he hits not the mark that I do.’

‘A fair wager,’ cried Locksley, ‘which I readily accept.’

“At the instigation of the champions the broad target was removed, and
in its place, a slight willow wand, not above an inch and a half in
circumference, was planted firmly in the earth. The spectators gazed with
increased wonder. ‘They surely will not aim at such a mark as that,’ said
they one to another. But the royal bowman stepped to the line, and after
carefully adjusting his arrow, let it fly: it peeled off the bark of
the wand as it passed by, and alighted in the earth a few yards farther
on. A loud huzza rent the air, and ‘Clifton! a Clifton!’ was shouted
from one end of the lists to the other. The gay yeoman did not wait till
these cries had subsided. ‘I will notch his shaft,’ he said aloud as
he advanced composedly to his post; and fitting his arrow, he drew the
bow-string to his ear, and after one moment’s deliberation discharged the
weapon with his utmost force. The shaft flew true, and to the amazement
of the beholders, rived asunder that of his opponent. At first a deep
silence prevailed, many could not see where the arrow had struck, and
some were dumb with astonishment; but when one of the attendants pulled
it forth, a shout of applause was raised, so loud, so long, and so
vehement, that those of the good citizens of London who had remained at
home rushed forth from the gates in hundreds to inquire the cause of so
violent an outbreak.

“The king’s vexation at this defeat of his party quickly changed into
admiration of Locksley’s superior skill. He rode up to his side: ‘Wilt
thou be one of my archers?’ he asked; ‘a hundred pounds a year, the free
use of my pantry, and a new suit of livery each three months, shall be
thy reward.’

“‘It grieves me, my liege,’ replied the yeoman, ‘that I cannot comply
with thy request; but grant me one boon, and I and my gallant men will
support thee to our deaths.’

“‘Name it, good Locksley; ’tis already granted;’ said the king.

“‘Pardon, most gracious liege, pardon for the outlawed Robin Hood and his
brave followers.’

“‘And art thou Robin Hood?’ asked Henry, his countenance flushed with
anger, ‘whose defiance of the law has filled the whole north country with
alarm. By St. George, but thou art the boldest villain that e’er shot
bow. Ho! guards there, take charge of this over-valiant knave.’

“‘Remember thy promise,’ cried a gentle voice from the gallery. ‘Remember
thou hast pledged thine honour.

“King Henry turned as he recognised the sweet tones of his lovely
consort, and a smile played upon his lips as he replied, ‘’Twas but
in jest, fair Eleanor, ’twas but in jest.’ ‘We will willingly grant
pardon to thee and thy followers,’ he continued to the outlaw, ‘if ye
will forsake your unlawful pursuits, and lead the sober lives of honest
yeomen.’

“‘We cannot quit the green woods of Sherwood,’ said Robin Hood; ‘but if
your majesty will grant us leave to range the forest, and now and then
exercise our archery upon one of the thousands of fat deer that bound
so gaily o’er the lawns, we will promise that no traveller shall again
complain of the outlaws of Nottinghamshire.’

“The king bit his lips in silence, but at that moment the defeated
archer advanced and tendered his bow to the victor.

“‘Thou’rt a good marksman, Clifton,’ said he; ‘if thou hadst made a
little more allowance for the distance, thine arrow would not have passed
the wand; keep thy bow, man; though I tell it thee, there’s but one
better archer in merry England.’

“‘If I had known that thou wert Robin Hood,’ cried the bishop of
Hereford, as the king delivered the well-filled purses to the outlaw, ‘I
would not have wagered against thee. Thou hast already had more gold of
mine than I e’er intended.’

“‘Surely thou dost not forget the jovial dinner we gave thee under our
trysting tree,’ replied Robin Hood; ‘yet if thou dost begrudge the
payment, I will return it even now.’

“‘Nay, nay, master,’ cried Little John, who had accompanied his captain,
‘that were unwise; since thou hast promised not to relieve travellers
of their superfluous wealth, ’twere folly not to keep all the gold thou
comest honestly by.’ Robin Hood with a smile threw the purses to his more
considerate follower, bowed low to the king, and still lower to his fair
patroness, and accompanied by his five gay yeomen, departed from the
field.

“Sherwood forest soon rung again with the sound of his bugle-horn,
but the promise given on Finsbury field was kept during King Henry’s
life-time; no traveller had reason to complain of the bold outlaws.


THE KNIGHT OF WIERYSDALE.

“We must suppose that several years had elapsed since Robin Hood’s
victory in Finsbury field, when the following tale commences. Richard
the Lion-hearted had succeeded to his father’s throne, and with many
of his nobles had joined the memorable crusades. During his absence in
Palestine, the internal state of England had become far worse than it was
at the time of his accession. Baron rose up against baron, and princes
made war upon each other, till discord, tumult, and fierce rapine,
reigned throughout the land. It was not, therefore, to be wondered at,
when the laws were for a time suspended and force of arms alone decided
the contest, that the bold foresters had again recourse to their superior
strength.

“It was a bright morning in early summer, when a solitary horseman was
proceeding upon his journey through one of the narrow roads that crossed
Barnesdale forest;

    “‘All dreary was his semblance,
      And little was his pride,
    His one foot in the stirrup stood,
      The other waved beside;

    “‘His hood was hanging o’er his eyes,
      He rode in simple array,
    A sorrier man than he was one
      Rode never on summer’s day.’

“A deep sigh escaped from the melancholy horseman, and big tears coursed
each other down his cheeks, at every step of his poor lean beast; and
when three men suddenly emerged from the wood, and stood before his path,
he seemed scarcely conscious of their presence.

“‘God save thee, sir knight,’ cried one of them, a tall forester, nearly
seven feet high, moved with compassion at his forlorn appearance.
‘Welcome to our merry green-wood. Thou must be our guest to-day.’

“‘Leave me, good sirs, I pray ye,’ said the knight mournfully, ‘my
sorrows are already too heavy for me to bear; add not to my distress.’

“‘Nay, be not so downcast,’ returned the former speaker. ‘Thou art in
good hands, and may’st trust us. Our master waits dinner for a guest, and
thou art the first man who has passed through Barnesdale this day.’ Then
taking the knight’s rein in his hand, the forester led the jaded steed
through the intricate paths of the wood, until he arrived at an open
lawn, where a band of yeomen were reclining under the shade of a huge elm.

“‘Welcome, sir knight,’ said one of them rising and doffing his cap at
the appearance of a stranger. ‘Welcome to merry Barnesdale.’

“‘Who art thou,’ inquired the horseman, ‘that causest travellers to be
constrained from their way? I am but a poor knight, without so much as a
piece of gold, wherewith to buy me food.’

“‘More welcome still,’ exclaimed the forester, assisting him from his
horse. ‘We shall have the blessings of charity upon our deeds. Thou
hast heard of Robin Hood,—I am that outlaw, and these are my gallant
followers.’

“‘Unless report belie thee,’ replied the knight, ‘thou art a friend to
the unfortunate. Dismiss me at once, and let me speed on.’

“‘Dine with us first,’ said the forester, ‘and freely shalt thou
depart.’ A cloth was spread beneath the shady branches, and covered with
a profusion of the most delicious viands. Rhenish wine also, and ale
plentifully abounded, and with cheerful hearts about twenty yeomen seated
themselves around. ‘Eat gladly, sir knight,’ said Robin Hood; ‘here’s to
thy health, and a more merry countenance;’ and as he spake he tossed off
the contents of a goblet.

“‘Thanks, thanks, my noble host,’ replied the stranger; ‘it grieves me
that I shall ne’er be able to return thy goodness.’

“‘Truly, good sir, thou look’st but grievous,’ answered the outlaw. ‘Tell
me, is there aught in which my services can avail thee; what is the cause
of thy deep sorrow?’

“‘I have lost land and gold,’ returned the knight, ‘and I fear that my
good name must follow them.’ His tears burst out afresh. ‘They call me,’
he continued, ‘Sir Rychard o’ the Lee. I am sprung of noble blood, and
for these last three hundred years have mine ancestors wore spurs. Twelve
short months ago I had a noble house and fine estate, with four hundred
pounds a year; but now, except my lovely wife and my sweet children, I
have nothing in the world.’

“‘How hast thou lost thy riches?” inquired Robin Hood anxiously.

“‘’Tis a short story,’ replied the knight; ‘I fought in a fair field with
a knight of Lancashire, and slew him. To save my liberty, I mortgaged
the broad lands of Wierysdale to St. Mary’s Abbey, and if I pay not the
amount to-morrow, my castle will be forfeited.’

“‘What is the sum thou owest, and what wilt thou do if thou losest thy
land?’ asked the outlaw.

“‘Four hundred golden pounds must I pay, if I would keep fair
Wierysdale,’ he replied. ‘I go to beg grace for another year; if the holy
abbot will not grant it, I must flee away across the broad seas to a
country where they know me not.’

“‘Where are thy friends?’ asked Little John; ‘will they not be security
for thee?’

“‘Alas,’ replied Sir Rychard, ‘when I had money and house, and lands, I
lacked not friends, but now my oldest companions turn from me as a herd
of deer would from a poor wounded hart. My only trust is in God and the
blessed saints.’

“‘Will Peter, or Paul, or John, be surety for thee?’ asked the outlaw.
‘By my troth, good sir, thou must find wealthier friends than they.’

“‘I have none other,’ replied the knight mournfully, ‘except it be the
Blessed Mary, who in all my trials has never failed me.’

“‘Thou hast indeed a good friend,’ said Robin Hood; ‘and if thou wilt
swear by our dear Lady that in twelve months from this day it shalt be
restored to me, I will lend thee what thou wantest.’ The knight fell upon
his knees, gave the required promise, and drawing forth a silver image of
the Virgin, he devoutly kissed it.
“‘By my troth,’ cried he, when he had recovered his feet, there is pith
in that arm of thine. I’ll warrant me thou canst shoot a bow as well
as us.’ The bishop laughed again, and taking up Robin Hood’s forfeited
weapon, let fly at the garland. The arrow, too strongly shot, flew above
the wand, and struck into a tree on the further side of the lawn.

“‘Now thou must take _thy_ pay,’ exclaimed the outlaw; and striding
towards him, he gave him a vigorous blow, but the priest did not waver
an inch. At that instant a horseman galloped swiftly across the plain,
and leaping from his steed, ran to them: it was the knight of Wierysdale.
‘Away, my brave men,—away,’ he shouted; ‘King Richard is seeking for ye.
The forest is beset with men, and ye will——’ He suddenly paused; his
eye had caught the keen glance with which the bishop was regarding him.
He threw himself at his feet:—‘Pardon, gracious sire,’ he exclaimed,
‘one who has served thee long and faithfully.’ Robin Hood was struck
dumb—the truth flashed across his mind:—it was King Richard whom he had
so unceremoniously buffeted. He fell upon his knees by the knight’s side,
and sued for mercy.

[Illustration: THE OUTLAW’S ALLEGIANCE.

J. Gilbert]

“‘Sir knight,’ exclaimed the noble king, ‘thou hast done wrong, but I
forgive thee; rise,—thy lands are restored to thee. As for thee, thou
valiant traitor, he continued, placing his hand on Robin Hood’s head, ‘on
one condition only can I grant thy pardon. Thou and thy men must follow
me to London, and be my royal archers.’ The outlaws shouted with rapture;
cries of ‘Long live King Richard’ rent the air, and every man bent his
knee to their royal master.

“The king then mounted his palfrey and retired, accompanied by Robin
Hood, Little John, and Will Scarlet, each of whom he soon afterwards
appointed to some place of dignity. Many of the foresters dispersed to
various parts, but fifty of the most faithful followed their beloved
master to London.

“Here, it is said, our brave hero assumed his title of earl of
Huntingdon, and lived in most noble style; but soon growing tired of
the confinement of the court, he asked permission to revisit the merry
woods. The king granted him seven days, but when Robin Hood breathed the
delightful air of Sherwood, and heard the songs of the sweet birds, he
could not tear himself away. He ranged through many a well-known thicket
and oft-frequented lawn, and in the ecstacy of his delight he set his
bugle horn to his mouth, and made the old trees re-echo with the blast.
To his great astonishment it was replied to, and four-score youths
bounded towards him. Several had deserted him in London, and many who
were at first disbanded had returned to their favourite haunts, and Robin
Hood was again acknowledged as the leader of a forest band. Little John
and Will Scarlet soon learned the intelligence, and with all speed joined
him with the rest.

“King Richard was enraged; he sent a renowned knight with two hundred
soldiers to capture the rebellious outlaw, and a desperate fight took
place upon a plain in Sherwood forest. It lasted from sun-rise to
sun-set, but neither party could boast of victory, and the knight lost
many of his men. Robin Hood himself was wounded by an arrow, and was
obliged to be taken to Kirkleys Nunnery, where he was treacherously
suffered to bleed to death by the prioress. As he found his end
approaching he called Little John to him. ‘Carry me into the woods, I
entreat thee,’ he said to him;

    “‘And give me my bent bow in my hand,
      And a broad arrow I’ll let flee;
    And where this arrow is taken up
      There shall my grave digged be.”

“The outlaw shot his last bow. His shaft flew feebly to a short distance,
and fell beneath an oak. He leaned back into the arms of his faithful
attendant—and died. His wish was complied with; and a stone was placed
upon the green sod to mark the last resting-place of the brave Robin
Hood; it bore this inscription:—

    “Here, underneath this little stone,
    Lies Robert, Earl of Huntingdon.
    Ne’er archer was as he so good;
    And people called him ‘Robin Hood.’
    Such outlaws as he and his men
    Will England never see again.”

I was obliged to hurry the latter part of my stories more than I could
have wished, but I had scarcely finished, before our faithful monitor,
the sonorous school bell, called us to our less pleasing, but more
important pursuits.

The holidays soon after commenced, and we all returned HOME.


THE END.

CLARKE, PRINTERS, SILVER STREET, FALCON SQUARE, LONDON.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROBIN HOOD AND HIS MERRY
FORESTERS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.